REPORT
FEBRUARY 2 0 1 9
PROJ ECT O N EUROPE AND THE TRANSAT L A N T I C RELATIONSHIP
NATO at
Seventy
An Alliance in Crisis
Ambassador Douglas Lute Ambassador Nicholas Burns
Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org/Transatlantic
Statements and views expressed in this report are solely those of the authors and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, the Harvard Kennedy School, or the Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs.
The authors of this report invite liberal use of the information provided in it for educational
purposes, requiring only that the reproduced material clearly cite the source.
Design and Layout by Andrew Facini
Cover photo: A U.S. Marine carries cold weather equipment as he begins to march across the Icelandic
terrain in preparation for NATO’s Trident Juncture 2018 exercise, October 19, 2018. (NATO Photo)
Copyright 2019, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America
PROJ ECT O N EUROPE AND THE TRANSAT L A N T I C RELATIONSHIP
REPORT
FEBRUARY 2 0 1 9
NATO at
Seventy
An Alliance in Crisis
Ambassador Douglas Lute Ambassador Nicholas Burns

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School iii
About this Report
“NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis” is a report by the Project on Europe and
the Transatlantic Relationship at Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for
Science and International Affairs. This Project aims to strengthen teaching, research,
and policy-making on the relationship between the United States and Europe.
This report is timed to coincide with the 70th anniversary of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization in 2019 as the world’s most successful alliance faces perhaps
the most daunting and complex set of challenges in its history. This report identifies
ten major challenges for NATO—some from within the Alliance, others from
beyond its borders or looming on the horizon—and specific recommendations for
how to resolve them.
This report benefited from discussions with experts and officials on both sides
of the Atlantic. The report’s authors are Ambassador (Ret.) Douglas Lute,
Senior Fellow at the Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship and
President of Cambridge Global Advisors and Ambassador (Ret.) Nicholas Burns,
Faculty Chair of the Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship and
Roy and Barbara Goodman Family Professor of the Practice of Diplomacy and
International Politics at Harvard Kennedy School. Both are former Permanent
Representatives of the United States to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
iv NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
About the Authors
Ambassador (Ret.) Douglas Lute
Senior Fellow with the Project on Europe and the Transatlantic
Relationship, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
President, Cambridge Global Advisors
Ambassador (Ret.) Douglas Lute is the former United States Ambassador
to NATO (2013-2017) where he contributed to designing and implementing
the responses of the Alliance to the most severe security challenges in
Europe since the end of the Cold War. A career Army officer, in 2010 Lute
retired from active duty as a lieutenant general after 35 years of service. In
2007 President Bush named him as Assistant to the President and Deputy
National Security Advisor to coordinate the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
In 2009 he was the senior White House official retained by President
Obama. Across these two Administrations, he served a total of six years in
the White House. Before being assigned to the White House, General Lute
served as Director of Operations (J3) on the Joint Staff, overseeing U.S.
military operations worldwide. He now holds the McDermott Chair of
Social Sciences at West Point and is a member of the Council on Foreign
Relations, the Senior Military Advisory Group of the United States
Institute of Peace, and the Board of Directors of the Atlantic Council.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School v
Ambassador (Ret.) Nicholas Burns
Roy and Barbara Goodman Family Professor of the Practice of
Diplomacy and International Politics, Harvard Kennedy School
Ambassador (Ret.) Nicholas Burns is the Roy and Barbara Goodman
Family Professor of the Practice of Diplomacy and International Relations
at Harvard Kennedy School. He is Faculty Chair of the Future of Diplomacy
Project and the Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship. He is
Director of the Aspen Strategy Group and a Senior Counselor at the Cohen
Group. From 2014-2017, he was a member of Secretary of State John
Kerry’s Foreign Affairs Policy Board at the U.S. Department of State. He
served in the United States Foreign Service for twenty-seven years until
his retirement in April 2008. He was Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs from 2005 to 2008. Prior to that, he was Ambassador to NATO
(2001-2005), Ambassador to Greece (1997-2001), and State Department
Spokesman (1995-1997). He worked on the National Security Council staff
where he was Senior Director for Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia Affairs and
Special Assistant to President Clinton and, before that, Director for Soviet
Affairs for President George H.W. Bush. Earlier in his career, he worked
at the American Consulate General in Jerusalem and in the American
Embassies in Egypt and Mauritania. He serves on the board of several corporate
and non-profit organizations.
vi NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Contributors
The authors gratefully acknowledge the extraordinary substantive contributions
of our colleagues at Harvard who worked tirelessly on this report.
It would not have been completed without them.
RESEARCH ASSOCIATES
Seth A. Johnston
Council on Foreign Relations International Affairs Fellow & Visiting Scholar,
Center for European Studies, Harvard University
Dr. Seth Johnston is a Major in the United States Army and veteran of
NATO, most recently serving as a task force commander with the NATO
Resolute Support mission in Afghanistan. Formerly an Assistant Professor
of International Relations at West Point, he is the author of How NATO
Adapts: Strategy and Organization in the Atlantic Alliance since 1950.
Gabrielle Tarini
Master in Public Policy Candidate, Class of 2019, Harvard Kennedy School
Gabrielle Tarini is a Master in Public Policy candidate at the Harvard
Kennedy School and research assistant at the Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs. Previously, she was a Rosenthal Fellow in
the Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Policy and a research
associate at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies. She
holds a B.A. in International Studies from Boston College.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School vii
PROJECT ON EUROPE AND THE TRANSATLANTIC
RELATIONSHIP PROGRAM SUPPORT
Cathryn Clüver Ashbrook
Executive Director, the Future of Diplomacy Project & the Project on Europe
and the Transatlantic Relationship, Belfer Center
Cathryn Clüver Ashbrook is the founding Executive Director of the Future
of Diplomacy Project & the Project on Europe and the Transatlantic
Relationship. Her areas of expertise include EU-U.S. relations and digital
public policy in urban and national contexts. Cathryn holds a Master in
Public Administration from Harvard Kennedy School, a Master’s Degree
in European Studies from the London School of Economics, and an undergraduate
degree from Brown University.
Alison Hillegeist
Assistant Director, the Future of Diplomacy Project & the Project on Europe
and the Transatlantic Relationship, Belfer Center; Special Assistant to
Professor Nicholas Burns
Alison Hillegeist has spent a 22-year career in non-profit organizations
and higher education with expertise in developing and managing complex
programs and projects, building partnerships in national and international
settings, and fostering collaboration across disciplines and cultures. She has
a B.A. in International Relations and a M.A. in Sustainable Development.
Patricia Morris
Research Director, NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Patricia Morris leads the future of NATO initiative of the Belfer Center’s
Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship. She is an international
conflict and governance professional, and previously worked at West Point,
the World Bank, and Conflict Dynamics International, among others. She is
a Truman Project National Security Fellow. She holds an MSc in Conflict
Studies from the London School of Economics and Political Science and a
B.A. in Political Science and French from Wellesley College.
viii NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Acknowledgements
This report benefited from the advice and comments of experts, scholars and
practitioners representing generations of experience on the trans-Atlantic
relationship. The authors are particularly grateful to the individuals listed on
the following pages for their contributions to this report. The individuals on
this list do not necessarily endorse all the recommendations in this report.
The authors accept full responsibility for the contents of the report.
North American Consultations
Secretary Madeleine Albright, Former United States Secretary of State
Dr. Jordan Becker, Senior Transatlantic Fellow, Institute for European Studies,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Robert Bell, Former Defense Advisor, United States Mission to the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization
Secretary Ash Carter, Former United States Secretary of Defense and Director of
the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Dr. Philippe Le Corre, Senior Fellow, Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business and
Government, Harvard Kennedy School and Affiliate, Belfer Center's Project on
Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship
Ambassador Ivo Daalder, Former United States Permanent Representative to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Dr. Karen Donfried, President of the German Marshall Fund of the United States
Thomas Donilon, Former United States National Security Advisor
Ambassador Kay Bailey Hutchison, United States Permanent Representative to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Ambassador Robert Hunter, Former United States Permanent Representative to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
General James Jones, Former NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe
Dr. Andrea Kendall-Taylor, Senior Fellow and Director of the Transatlantic Security
Program at the Center for a New American Security
Dr. Ian Lesser, Vice President of the German Marshall Fund of the United States
Ambassador Victoria Nuland, Former United States Permanent Representative to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Dr. Alina Polyakova, David M. Rubenstein Fellow at the Brookings Institution
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School ix
Secretary Colin Powell, Former United States Secretary of State
Eric Rosenbach, Co-Director of the Belfer Center for Science and International
Affairs at Harvard Kennedy School
Dr. Mary Sarotte, Kravis Chair in Historical Studies at Johns Hopkins School of
Advanced International Studies
Dr. Timothy Andrews Sayle, Assistant Professor at the University of Toronto
Professor Stanley R. Sloan, Nonresident Senior Fellow at the Atlantic Council and
former Founding Director of the Atlantic Community
James Townsend, Former United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Europe and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Ambassador Alexander “Sandy” Vershbow, Former Deputy Secretary General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and former Permament Representative to
the NATO and U.S. Ambassador to Russia
Damon Wilson, former Special Assistant to the U.S. President, Senior Director for
Europe Affairs at the National Security Council, and Executive Vice President of the
Atlantic Council
European Consultations
General Knud Bartels, Former Chairman of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Military Committee
Rose Gottemoeller, Deputy Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization
Ambassador Wolfgang Ischinger, Chairman, Munich Security Conference
Dr. Alexander Mattelaer, Academic Director of the Institute for European Studies
at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel
The Right Honourable Lord Robertson of Port Ellen KT, Former Secretary General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, Former Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and former Foreign Minister of the Netherlands
Ambassador Stefano Stefanini, Former Permanent Representative of Italy to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Lieutenant General Steven Shepro, Deputy Chairman of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization Military Committee
Dr. Nathalie Tocci, Director at the Istituto Affari Internazionali
Ambassador Tomáš Valášek, Former Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School xi
Table of Contents
Executive Summary...................................................................................1
NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis..............................................13
Challenges from Within NATO.........................................................................13
Challenges from Beyond NATO’s Borders.....................................................24
Challenges on the Horizon..............................................................................35
Meeting the Challenges...................................................................................38
Conclusion.........................................................................................................43
A Slovak soldier with Stefanik Company charges through smoke
during an exercise in eastern Latvia, October 4, 2018.
Stefanik Company, a mechanized infantry unit currently based in
Adaži, Latvia, is Slovakia’s first contribution to NATO’s enhanced
Forward Presence in Eastern Europe.
NATO Photo
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 1
Executive Summary
Approaching the seventieth anniversary of its founding in April 1949,
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) remains the single most
important contributor to security, stability and peace in Europe and
North America.
NATO provides the umbrella defending Europe from conventional and
nuclear attack and a secure geopolitical landscape for the world’s two
largest economies—the European Union and the United States. NATO
members comprise the largest and strongest alliance of democratic countries
in the world. They contain Russian aggression and protect over 100
million East Europeans who now live in democracy and freedom after the
fall of communism.1 Far from obsolete, NATO remains vital for the more
than 900 million Europeans and North Americans who benefit from it
every day.2 It is no overstatement that if NATO did not exist today, countries
on both sides of the Atlantic would need to create it in a troubled,
divisive 21st century where authoritarian powers are on the rise.
The NATO allies, however, are confronting daunting and complex challenges
that are testing both their purpose and unity. Based on extensive
discussions with current European and North American leaders, former
senior officials, academics and journalists during the past six months, this
report argues that NATO needs to come to grips with ten major challenges
this year. The list is long, with simultaneous challenges from within the
alliance, from beyond NATO’s borders and looming on the horizon. Most
significant is a challenge NATO has not faced before: the absence of strong
American presidential leadership. NATO’s leaders need to act decisively
in 2019 to meet these tests and heal the widening divisions within the
Alliance before it is too late.
2 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Challenges from Within NATO
Reviving American Leadership of the Alliance
NATO’s single greatest challenge is the absence of strong, principled
American presidential leadership for the first time in its history. President
Donald Trump is regarded widely in NATO capitals as the Alliance’s most
urgent, and often most difficult, problem. NATO leaders, for example,
considered not holding a 2019 summit to mark the seventieth anniversary
this spring as they did in decades past. They feared President Trump would
blow up a meeting in controversy as he has done each time he has met with
NATO leaders during the past two years. Wary of his past behavior, NATO
plans a scaled down leaders meeting for December 2019.
President Trump’s open ambivalence about NATO’s value to the U.S.,
his public questioning of America’s Article 5 commitment to its allies,
persistent criticism of Europe’s democratic leaders and embrace of its
anti-democratic members and continued weakness in failing to confront
NATO’s primary adversary President Vladimir Putin of Russia, have hurtled
the Alliance into its most worrisome crisis in memory.3
There is no reason to believe President Trump’s attitude will change for
the better during the next two years. He believes NATO allies are taking
advantage of the U.S.4 These are the same allies and partners who came
to America’s defense on 9/11, suffered more than 1,000 battlefield deaths
alongside American soldiers in Afghanistan,5 are fighting with the U.S.
now against the Islamic State and shoulder the main burden sustaining a
fragile peace in the Balkans, in both Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
President Trump is the first U.S. president to view the European Union
as an economic competitor rather than a vital partner of both the U.S.
and NATO. His troubling anti-NATO and anti-Europe bias has caused
European governments to question the credibility of the U.S. as the leader
of the West for the first time since the Second World War.6 The European
public confidence in American leadership is also at historically low depths.7
Every American president before Trump has encouraged the strength and
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 3
unity of Europe as a core interest of the U.S. Trump may well cause even
greater damage to the Alliance while he remains in office.
For this reason, Republicans and Democrats in Congress must act together
as a blocking force against President Trump’s dangerous policies. Congress,
on a bipartisan basis, should reaffirm the U.S. commitment to the Article
5 defense clause in the NATO Treaty. Congress should pass legislation this
year requiring Congressional approval should President Trump attempt
to alter U.S. treaty commitments to NATO allies or to have the U.S. leave
the Alliance altogether.8 Congress should continue to fund the “European
Deterrence Initiative” to bolster U.S. military strength in Europe that is the
primary deterrent against Russian adventurism.
Restoring European Defense Strength
NATO’s European members and Canada pose their own challenge to the
Alliance—the weakness of their collective defense spending for NATO’s
common defense. President Trump has been right to push allies to spend
more on defense. He has the support of the U.S. Congress and many
Americans in doing so. It is simply unfair that only five of the twenty-nine
allies are currently spending at least 2 percent of their Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) on their military budgets, while the U.S. is spending 3.5
percent and shouldering much of the defense burden.9
Germany, the largest and wealthiest of the European allies, has a major
shortfall as it is currently spending only 1.24 percent of its budget on
defense. Its coalition government has not summoned the strength and
determination to convince the Bundestag and the German public to
reach the minimum 2 percent level soon. Germany is thus abdicating this
most basic obligation as a member of NATO. Italy, Canada, Spain, the
Netherlands and other allies are also spending well below the agreed 2
percent level.10
Having made his point, President Trump should also acknowledge
that aggregate NATO defense spending trends are actually heading
in the right direction, despite insufficient spending by some allies.
NATO allies have produced four consecutive years of real growth for a
4 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
collective increase in spending of $87 billion, particularly in reaction
to Putin’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 and President Trump’s public
pressure since 2017.11 A majority of NATO members plan to reach
the 2 percent level by the agreed target date of 2024. More than half
will spend 20 percent of their defense budgets on new equipment and
research and development.12 This new spending is critical to produce
added NATO defense capabilities, including intelligence-surveillance-
reconnaissance, cyber and digital technologies.
The challenge for President Trump on NATO defense spending is to pivot
from chief critic to chief cheerleader. His administration should also
support new European Union efforts to strengthen the EU’s own defense
capacity as long as it complements, and not duplicates, NATO’s existing
capabilities and programs.
Upholding NATO’s Democratic Values
NATO is struggling to confront a potentially cancerous threat from within.
Three allied governments—Poland, Hungary and Turkey—have undermined
their own democracies in varying degrees by suppressing free speech and a
free press and limiting the independence of the courts.13 As NATO is, first
and foremost, an alliance of democracies, the actions of these governments
threaten the core values—democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law—
to which each ally is committed in the North Atlantic Treaty.
Nearly every current and former NATO official with whom we talked for
this report worried that a recommendation for NATO to discipline these
anti-democratic governments would be highly problematic and divisive.
Nonetheless, we believe NATO must find a way to shine a light on these
recalcitrant allies. For example, NATO could review annually each ally’s
democratic practices, perhaps in a report prepared by a high-level, outside
group. Allies that violate basic democratic standards could be suspended
from NATO military exercises or denied access to NATO training and
common infrastructure funding.
More than one European mentioned to us the ironic fact that the U.S. itself
may be chastised for a deterioration of its own democratic standards in
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 5
such a process. Nevertheless, ignoring this challenge of democratic principles
will undermine the core convictions that brought NATO together
seventy years ago.
Streamlining NATO Decision-Making
NATO allies have always reached critical decisions by consensus. This
continues to make sense for all allies to agree on how NATO should act
on major issues. But, it is time for the Alliance to empower the Secretary
General on the administrative and resource issues that impede focusing
on more significant challenges. The Secretary General must have the
operational power to move an often-unwieldy Alliance forward in the way
it plans and operates on a daily basis. Also important is improving decision-
making in crisis scenarios.
Challenges from Beyond NATO’s Borders
Containing Putin’s Russia
NATO faces a challenge to deter further Russian aggression in Eastern
Europe. Russian President Vladimir Putin is destabilizing NATO partners
Ukraine and Georgia by the continued occupation of their territories. He
also seeks to weaken the three Baltic allies from within.14 And Russian
cyber attacks, political subversion and aggressive social media campaigns
pose a threat to all the NATO democracies and their electoral processes.
NATO allies thus need to take much stronger measures against Moscow
than they have to date by:
• Reaffirming economic sanctions on Russia will remain in place for
as long as it occupies Ukrainian territory;
• Sustaining indefinitely current back-to-back NATO rotational
troop deployments to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, while
adding enablers and improving readiness of reinforcements;
6 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
• Addressing vulnerabilities in the area of hybrid warfare urgently,
the most likely form of Russian aggression against the Alliance;
• Preparing cyber offensive options to deter Russia from further
cyber attacks.
At the same time, it makes sense for NATO leaders to maintain continuing
contacts with the Kremlin on the many issues that divide NATO allies
and Russia: Russia’s violation of Ukraine’s sovereign territory, dangerous
Russian air and sea maneuvers in the Baltic and Black Sea regions, the
Russian Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) violation,
Afghanistan and measures to prevent miscalculation that could lead to
conflict that all wish to avoid.
Containing Russian power will be a generational challenge until Putin’s
Soviet-trained leadership circle leaves power during the next decade, perhaps
beyond. There is no more important external challenge for NATO.
Ending the Afghan War
NATO’s largest and longest combat mission in Afghanistan is at a critical
juncture. The war with the Taliban is at a stalemate. Afghan civilian and
military casualties are at an all-time high.15 Few believe the war can be
won outright. President Trump appears determined to have the U.S. depart
quickly sometime in 2019 after nearly 18 years of combat. President Trump
and his advisors should proceed carefully, in close coordination with the
Afghan government, to avoid a precipitous U.S. departure that would jeopardize
American interests and risk further instability in Afghanistan.
The Trump administration is right to engage directly with the Taliban to
explore a political process to end the war. A durable, sustainable settlement
ultimately must be made among Afghans, including the elected Afghan
government and the Taliban. The interests and views of Afghanistan’s
neighbors and the NATO allies with troops on the ground must be considered
as well. The U.S. should proceed slowly and carefully, conditioning
troop withdrawals on the Taliban’s meeting agreed security and political
benchmarks beginning with a ceasefire and including agreeing to engage
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 7
with the Afghan government. NATO allies should adhere to the “in
together, out together” principle, avoiding unilateral national withdrawals.
Refocusing NATO Partnerships
NATO maintains a partnership with forty-one countries outside the
Alliance from Mauritania in West Africa to Japan.16 Many states have
been invaluable members of coalitions in Afghanistan, Iraq, the Balkans
and in the fight against the Islamic State. Most important, NATO should
strengthen its partnership with the European Union. Partnerships with the
Gulf Coordination Council, the African Union and the Arab League could
promote stability along NATO’s periphery.
Maintaining an Open Door to Future Members
Following a historic two-decade expansion of the NATO Alliance with
thirteen new members, NATO would be well advised to consolidate that
expansion once North Macedonia joins the Alliance in the coming months.
Over the next decade or two, however, NATO should keep the door
open for any European democracy that meets the strict qualifications for
membership. Georgia and Ukraine may not meet the conditions for years
to come, but it is in NATO’s interest to hold open the possibility of membership
in the long term. No country outside the Alliance, most especially
Russia, can have a veto over who NATO accepts as it pursues its goal of
providing for a free and peaceful European continent.
8 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Challenges on the Horizon
Winning the Technology Battle in the Digital Age
NATO faces yet another critical challenge in adapting quickly to a rapidly
changing, global, military technology landscape. Its often-byzantine
defense planning processes date to the Cold War, long before the extraordinary,
current advances in military arms powered by artificial intelligence,
cyber, robotics, quantum computing and biotechnology—perhaps the most
decisive change in military technology since the start of the nuclear age.
NATO allies, led by the United States, must now commit a far greater share
of their military budgets to acquiring these new military technologies, lest
China and Russia gain a decisive advantage in the decade ahead.
Competing with China
While China does not pose a direct military threat to most NATO allies, it
is emerging as a global competitor politically, economically and in seeking
dominance in digital military technologies. Europe, the United States
and Canada need to adopt a more cohesive approach to China. Beijing is
emerging as the strongest strategic competitor of both North America and
Europe in this century. The European allies need to focus more intently on
the challenge from Chinese economic and technological power and industrial
espionage. NATO allies should thus tighten restrictions on Chinese
investments in key technology sectors on both sides of the Atlantic. And
NATO should strengthen its military partnerships with Japan, South
Korea, Australia, New Zealand and others.
China will be the main geo-strategic competitor of the United States in the
decades ahead. It is in the interest of NATO allies to take on the defense
burden in the trans-Atlantic region more equitably, to enable the U.S. to
focus increasingly on the competition with China. In this strategic sense,
NATO’s military strength and unity could be a potentially decisive factor in
the long-term competition ahead in the Indo-Pacific. The goal is to live and
work with China where possible, but to compete to maintain the primacy
of the free, democratic countries in both Europe and the Indo-Pacific.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 9
Summary
The United States bears a special responsibility to help its allies to meet these
tests. President Trump is wrong to question NATO’s central importance to
American security. On its own, the United States is a powerful nation. But
America’s European and Canadian allies expand and amplify American
power in ways that Russia and China—with few allies of their own—can
never match. United States access to European air and naval bases alone
bring American forces a continent closer to the Middle East, Africa and parts
of Asia.17 The United States is substantially stronger in NATO than it would
be on its own. There is ample evidence President Trump does not understand—
and certainly does not appreciate—this basic strategic fact about
NATO.
This is why decisive action by the Congress this year to reassert America’s
commitment and leadership in NATO is imperative. And it is also why
NATO allies, on both sides of the Atlantic, must work together to narrow
the growing divisions within the Alliance and to meet these historic challenges
as NATO turns seventy.
10 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Notes for Executive Summary
1 The population of East European countries in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is approximately
109 million. See “NATO Countries: Statistical Profile,” Nation Master, accessed January 3,
2019, https://www.nationmaster.com/country-info/groups/NATO-countries.
2 “NATO Countries: Statistical Profile,” 2018; “US Population,” U.S. Census Bureau, accessed January
3, 2019, https://www.census.gov/popclock.
3 Julian E. Barnes and Helene Cooper, “Trump Discussed Pulling US From NATO, Aides Say Amid
New Concerns Over Russia,” The New York Times, January 14, 2018, https://www.nytimes.
com/2019/01/14/us/politics/nato-president-trump.html; Aaron Blake, “Trump’s Montenegro
comments make it abundantly clear he doesn’t understand NATO,” The Washington Post, July 28,
2018, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2018/07/18/trump-makes-it-abundantly-
clear-he-doesnt-know-how-nato-works/.
4 David Welna, “Fact Check: Trump’s Claims On NATO Spending,” National Public Radio, July 18, 2018,
https://www.npr.org/2018/07/11/628137185/fact-check-trumps-claims-on-nato-spending.
5 “Afghanistan Fatalities, Fatalities by Country,” iCasualties, accessed December 26, 2018, www.
iCasualties.org.
6 Angelique Chrisafis, “Europe can no longer rely on US for security, says Emmanuel Macron,” The
Guardian, August 27, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/aug/27/europe-can-no-longer-
rely-on-us-for-security-says-emmanuel-macron; Michael Birnbaum and Rick Noack, “Following
Trump’s trip, Merkel says Europe can’t rely on ‘others.’ She means the US,” The Washington Post,
May 28, 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/following-trumps-trip-merkel-says-europecant-
rely-on-us-anymore/2017/05/28/4c6b92cc-43c1-11e7-8de1-cec59a9bf4b1_story.html.
7 “Confidence in Trump remains low in key EU countries,” Pew Research Center, September 28,
2018, http://www.pewglobal.org/2018/10/01/trumps-international-ratings-remain-low-especially-
among-key-allies/pg_2018-10-1_u-s-image_0-5/.
8 The United States House of Representatives passed the NATO Support Act on January 2,
2018, which prohibits the appropriation or use of funds to withdraw the United States from the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. United States Congress, House, NATO Support Act, HR 676,
116th Congress, 1st sess., introduced in House January 17, 2019, https://www.congress.gov/
bill/116th-congress/house-bill/676; Similar action is under consideration in the Senate. See United
States Congress, House, NATO Support Act, HR 676, 116th Congress, 1st sess., introduced January
17, 2019, https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/676.
9 “Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2011-2018),” NATO Press Release PR/CP(2018)091, July
10, 2018, https://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/pdf_2018_07/20180709_180710-
pr2018-91-en.pdf. However, data on defense spending can be misleading. While the U.S. devotes 3.5
percent of GDP to defense, not all of that is committed to NATO.
10 “Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2011-2018),” 2018.
11 Nicholas Burns, “What America Gets Out of NATO,” The New York Times, July 11, 2018, https://www.
nytimes.com/2018/07/11/opinion/what-america-gets-out-of-nato.html.
12 “Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2011-2018),” 2018.
13 Jonathan Katz and Torrey Taussig, “An inconvenient truth: Addressing democratic backsliding
within NATO,” Brookings Institution, July 10, 2018, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/
2018/07/10/an-inconvenient-truth-addressing-democratic-backsliding-within-nato/.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 11
14 Paul Stronski and Richard Sokolsky, The Return of Global Russia: An Analytical Framework
(Washington, DC: The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, December 2017), https://carnegieendowment.
org/2017/12/14/return-of-global-russia-analytical-framework-pub-75003, p. 3-30.
15 “Quarterly Report on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict: 1 January to 30 September,
2018,” United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, October 10, 2018, https://unama.
unmissions.org/sites/default/files/unama_protection_of_civilians_in_armed_conflict_3rd_quarter_
report_2018_10_oct.pdf; Idrees Ali, “Afghan security forces’ deaths unsustainable: US military
official,” Reuters, December 4, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-afghanistan-military/
afghan-security-forces-deaths-unsustainable-u-s-military-official-idUSKBN1O32CS.
16 Partnership for Peace: Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Finland,
Georgia, Ireland, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Malta, The Republic of Moldova, Russia, Serbia,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, Uzbekistan; Mediterranean Dialogue: Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Mauritania, Morocco,
Tunisia; Istanbul Cooperation Initiative: Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, United Arab Emirates; Partners
from across the globe: Afghanistan, Australia, Colombia, Iraq, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mongolia,
New Zealand, Pakistan; International organizations: United Nations, European Union, Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. See “Partners,” NATO, last updated November 11, 2015,
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/51288.htm.
17 Jens Stoltenberg, “The Value of NATO in the 21st Century,” Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC,
September 14, 2018, https://www.heritage.org/defense/event/the-value-nato-the-21st-century/.
12 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
A view of the interior of the new NATO headquarters in
Brussels, February 22, 2018.
NATO Photo
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 13
NATO at Seventy:
An Alliance in Crisis
NATO stands once again at a crossroads, but this is different. As the world’s
oldest and most successful military alliance celebrates its seventieth anniversary
in April 2019, it faces an array of diverse, simultaneous challenges.
Some challenges are familiar, others new and pressing; some from within
the Alliance, others from beyond NATO’s borders and still others looming
on the horizon. Taken together, these challenges represent the most severe
crisis in the security environment in Europe since the end of the Cold War
and perhaps ever. The question is whether the Alliance can adapt to these
challenges, revitalized and retooled for the decades ahead. This report aims
to address the array of challenges and offer practical recommendations.
Challenges from Within NATO
Reviving American Leadership
The single greatest challenge NATO faces today is the critical need for
reviving strong, reliable American leadership. With American leadership,
anything is possible within the Alliance; absent American leadership, progress
will be slow at best. At the most basic level the next American
president must reaffirm U.S. commitment to the Alliance, especially the
Article 5 collective defense pledge, in both words and
deeds. Given the opportunity to do so within months
of his inauguration in May 2017, President Trump
refused to honor the U.S. commitment to Article 5,
even while unveiling a memorial at the new NATO
headquarters commemorating its historic invocation
after 9/11.1 His persistent disrespect toward some key
democratic leaders and warmth toward some autocrats,
denigration of NATO and the EU and penchant for
unpredictable statements and decisions combine to erode European governmental
and public confidence in American leadership.2
“...an armed attack
against one or more
[ally] in Europe
or North America
shall be considered
an attack against
them all...”
— Article 5,
Washington Treaty
14 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Actions speak louder than
words, but words still count.
Effective deterrence and
defense—the essence of
NATO—depend not only
on capability, but also on
adversaries’ perception of
allies’ collective political will.3
The U.S. demonstrates its
commitment to NATO with
senior diplomatic and military
leadership, troop deployments
to Europe including to the
Baltics and Poland, active participation
in NATO exercises
and prepositioning equipment
to ease rapid reinforcement.
Especially under the leadership of Secretary of Defense James Mattis, NATO
made progress on readiness, mobility, cyber security and command structure
reforms. Fortunately, bipartisan congressional support is unwavering: Senate
and House resolutions in 2017 reaffirming U.S. commitment to the Alliance,
the introduction of a Senate bill preventing the President from leaving
NATO without Senate approval in 2018 and 2019, the passage of a House
resolution in 2019 prohibiting the appropriation of funds to withdraw the
U.S. from NATO and steady funding increases for the European Deterrence
Initiative.4 Polls show that the American people, too, understand the value
of NATO and support the Alliance, including America’s Article 5 commitments.
5 This public support for trans-Atlantic ties is deeply rooted, as NATO
allies represent six of the ten largest diaspora groups in America.6 The Trump
administration’s Secretaries of State and Defense have reassured allies of the
U.S. commitment to NATO at the annual ministerial-level meetings.7 All of
these measures are necessary for deterrence and defense, but not sufficient
if the U.S. President casts doubt on America’s commitment. Meeting the
challenges outlined in this report begins with American leadership and
American leadership begins at the top.
The 9/11 and Article 5 Memorial at NATO Headquarters
in Brussels, November 21, 2018. (NATO Photo)
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 15
More broadly, the U.S. Government—both the executive and legislative
branches—is not working effectively and predictably.8 Staff vacancies and
lack of collaborative processes stagnate policy making and implementation.
Divisive hyper-partisan, zero-sum politics amplified by social media defy
compromise, strain Washington’s national security institutions and leave
U.S. allies questioning what may come next.
As President Trump cannot be expected to change, responsibility lies with
the Congress to check and balance his approach to NATO. We recommend
the Congress take specific steps this year:
• Congress should reaffirm again the U.S. commitment to the Article
5 defense clause in the NATO Treaty to express bipartisan support
for U.S. allies and to bolster deterrence.
• The Senate and House also should pass legislation this year requiring
congressional approval to alter any U.S. treaty commitments to
NATO or to withdraw the U.S. from the Alliance altogether.9
• Congress should continue to fund the “European Deterrence
Initiative” to reinforce American military strength in Europe, deter
Russian aggression and help with building NATO allies’ capability.
Restoring European Defense Strength
The issue of burden sharing is as old as the Alliance itself. In its current
form the debate springs from the Wales Summit in 2014 when for the first
time NATO leaders agreed to move toward the goal of 2 percent of their
national Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for defense spending by 2024, in
the Defense Investment Pledge.10 President Trump is right to demand progress
in accordance with the “Wales Pledge”—a critical part of NATO’s initial
reaction to Russian aggression in Ukraine in the first half of 2014.11 After
many years of steady decline in defense spending especially among European
allies, in the first four years after Wales, 2014-2018, there has been significant
progress: five allies now meet the 2 percent mark; all allies have made
real increases in spending; and cumulative increases outside the U.S. since
2014 total $87 billion.12 President Trump should acknowledge this progress
while continuing to press allies to do more. This progress, however, has been
16 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
overshadowed by President Trump’s fixation on 2 percent as the sole measure
of NATO’s value and his refusal to understand how NATO funding works.13
His public threats against allies who have not reached the mark is counter-
productive, making it harder for allied leaders seen by their publics as
complying with his demands.14 As a result, the 2 percent pledge designed to
unite the allies around a common goal has evolved into a most divisive issue
and diverts attention from equally important measures.
Figure 1: NATO Europe and Canada total defense expenditure (in 2010 $US billions).
Allies must contribute equitably to the Alliance and 2 percent of GDP is a
fair premium for the ‘whole life insurance’ benefit of Article 5’s collective
defense commitment.15 Allies must deliver. Germany especially, the largest
European ally and the strongest economy, must do much more, or its leadership
position within the Alliance will be jeopardized. But 2 percent was
never designed to be the sole measure of value. The Wales Pledge itself is
broader, committing allies to 20 percent of defense spending for major new
equipment and research and development of new capabilities, and highlighting
the importance of output measures as well. More than half of allies
have made the 20 percent target.16
While retaining the goal of 2 percent GDP for defense spending, it is time
for NATO, led by the United States, to broaden the framework by which
Source: “Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2011-2018)”, NATO, July 2018.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 17
it measures defense contributions. Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg
rightly notes that allies provide “cash, capabilities and contributions” that
strengthen NATO.17 Focusing on inputs alone is deceptive. European
NATO members together spend more than three times as much on defense
as Russia and slightly more than China.18 Total military spending by all
twenty-nine NATO members was $900 billion in 2017, accounting for 52
percent of world defense spending.19 Yet inefficiencies diminish the impact
of these investments and significant capability gaps persist, so merely
spending more is not sufficient.
We recommend three possible approaches. First, NATO should be more
transparent. Alongside measuring defense spending as an input, the
Alliance should make public more of its assessments of the capabilities that
defense budgets acquire, that is, how the inputs are spent, or measures of
output. Some will argue that this approach will reveal information that is
politically sensitive for some allies, but the overall benefit for the Alliance
is clear.20 NATO already publishes some data on outputs, which should
receive more attention.21 For example, money spent on current operations,
replenishing stocks, research and development on and acquiring new
equipment to fill identified capabilities gaps—such as precision munitions,
modern air and missile defenses and heavy airlift—is more important than
pensions for retired officers.22 Here the data are available and should be
carefully assessed annually and publicly by defense ministers. Focusing
more on outputs also can draw attention to the potential for increased specialization,
especially for smaller allies.
Second, the Alliance should ensure it is accounting fully for national
spending that contributes to NATO’s collective defense and security,
whether that spending is in defense ministries or other parts of national
budgets.23 NATO today faces a diverse range of threats that cannot be
addressed by conventional defense capabilities alone. Spending on national
cyber security and intelligence, for example, could well be included as
part of national defense expenditures for NATO purposes,24 especially in
this time when hybrid threats are so prominent as discussed later in this
report. Investment in dual-use transportation infrastructure that facilitates
movement of NATO forces across Europe is an important contribution, as
NATO now relies heavily on rapid reinforcement to complement in-place
18 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
forces.25 Some also suggest that development assistance funding that contributes
to stabilizing areas on NATO’s periphery in the Middle East and
North Africa also contributes to NATO’s security.26 While we do not suggest
including such spending under NATO’s internal definition of defense
expenditure, there is value in assessing it alongside defense expenditure in
public discussions on the topic. Such broader measures should supplement,
not replace or obscure, the Wales Pledge. We support taking a broad and
holistic approach to measuring what the Alliance needs and how each ally
contributes, in addition to the 2 percent pledge.
Third, the United States should support, rather than criticize, European
Union initiatives to promote European defense capabilities with legal,
institutional and financial incentives.27 The EU has a long way to go. After
Brexit, 80 percent of NATO’s defense spending will come from allies outside
the EU and the EU’s military capability will be greatly diminished,
making NATO even more important.28 It is in the United States’ interest
to support European defense initiatives—for example the Permanent
Structured Cooperation (PESCO), the European Defense Fund (EDF) and
military mobility improvements—so long as these contribute to NATO as
well.29 As agreed in the original Brussels and Berlin agreements of the late
1990s, the standard should remain that EU initiatives must be complementary
to NATO, not competitive.30 The measure is straightforward: NATO
assesses regularly what capabilities it needs, and the EU should do likewise.
This should lead to developing and delivering those mutually reinforcing
capabilities, which would be available to both organizations. Avoiding
duplication is the key. For example, NATO and the EU both require airlift
and intelligence-surveillance-reconnaissance capabilities; so, if a European
ally acquires these with EU assistance they should be available for both
NATO and EU operations based on a national decision. On the other
hand, NATO already has world-class standing headquarters structures and
communications capabilities, which can be made available to the EU so the
Union need not invest in these. EU initiatives will be even more important
in the future as the expense of modern systems continues to increase,
demanding greater efficiency, sharing and inevitably specialization.31 As
European defense spending increases, European allies should seek “strategic
responsibility” but not aim for stand-alone “strategic autonomy” for
collective defense.32 It is important to sustain the shared understanding
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 19
that for the collective defense of the continent—especially against Russian
aggression—the United States must be heavily engaged, and, as all allies
agree, that means NATO.
In summary, as Lord Robertson, former NATO Secretary General, states
“NATO needs the military capability to go far, go fast, hit hard and stay
long.” These are the essence of restoring European defense strength.
Upholding NATO’s Democratic Values
From the outset in 1949, NATO formed around
common values: democracy, individual liberty and
the rule of law.33 These values are a significant part of
the glue that has held the Alliance together for seventy
years, through decades of the Cold War, at the end of
the Cold War in 1989-1991 and during the decades
that followed. Yet today, as the Alliance again faces
diverse challenges, there is obvious drift from these
core values within some member states. The rise of
authoritarian tendencies that erode democratic values
is not entirely new to the Alliance. NATO has seen
military dictatorships in the past.34 Today, again there is a pattern among several
allies that places in question their commitment to the values that underpin
the Alliance. Wherever it occurs in member states, the Alliance must confront
authoritarian centralization of executive power; suppression of free press, civil
society and political opposition; and interference with the judiciary.
NATO needs to take a hard look at itself. Across twenty-five indicators of
democracy rated by Freedom House, the downward trend among NATO
allies over the past decade is stark.35 Especially in Central Europe but not
exclusively, there are setbacks in the media, the judiciary and the functioning
of national democratic institutions. The rate at which democracy is declining
in Poland, Hungary and Turkey is particularly alarming. In 2017 and 2018,
these three states’ scores represented some of the largest one-year declines
in political rights and civil liberties of all 195 countries ranked by Freedom
House.36 Poland—with the largest category declines in the forty-year history
of the survey—is close to leaving the “consolidated democracy” category.37
“The Parties to
this Treaty....
are determined to
safeguard the freedom,
common heritage and
civilisation of their
peoples, founded on
the principles of
democracy, individual
liberty and the
rule of law.”
— Washington Treaty
20 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Hungary is no longer rated a consolidated democracy. Turkey, whose decline
in freedom over the last ten years represents the largest of any country in the
world, crossed the threshold from “free” to “not free.”38
Figure 2: Average of NATO members’ Political Rights and Civil Liberties ratings according to
Freedom House, 1973-2018. (1 = most free.)
While less severe today, nationalist populism movements in other allies
represent a broader, more diffuse threat to NATO and can amplify other
challenges facing the Alliance. The United States is not immune, with its
Freedom House rating declining in 2018 due to “Russian interference in
the 2016 election, violations of basic ethical standards by the new administration
and a reduction in government transparency.”39 While this slippage
in the U.S. is relatively recent and still minor in scale, it nonetheless diminishes
America’s standing as a standard-bearer for democracy and further
erodes its leadership position within the Alliance. Further, anti-democratic
policies among allies open vulnerabilities for interference by competitors
outside the Alliance, especially Russia that seeks to divide NATO and the
EU politically using hybrid tactics.40
The question for allies is what must the role of the Alliance be in reinforcing
its core values when they are under assault from within. NATO is both
a political and a military alliance. It is not enough to be bound together
by a commitment only to Article 5 collective defense. The values in the
7th Enlargement
3rd Enlargement
4th Enlargement
5th Enlargement
6th Enlargement
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 21
Treaty and the adherence of NATO allies to those values is fundamental for
Alliance cohesion. That shared commitment to values in turn makes credible
the Article 5 commitment. The Washington Treaty is binding for both
its political and military commitments.41 Allies cannot ignore the failure
to abide by political commitments including values and expect military
commitments to be unaffected. In short, NATO allies should not expect
that they could violate democratic values without consequences, while
resting assured that NATO cohesion is intact and other commitments in
the Treaty will be upheld. The Treaty is not a menu of options from which
allies can select some obligations while ignoring others.
The NATO Treaty has no provision for policing members that drift from
common political values, unlike the European Union Treaty’s Chapter 7
that has been invoked recently toward several EU member states with some
success.42 While it would be impossible to achieve consensus to impose
penalties on wayward allies, given that the ally in question could veto any
penalties, a range of escalating political initiatives on the part of the Secretary
General and a coalition of the other allies could assert pressure. As a start,
the Secretary General should express concern in his bilateral meetings with
the anti-democratic governments, with the support of key allies and in partnership
with the European Union. To increase awareness within the Alliance
and among the public, foreign ministers could review annually indicators
of democracy for all twenty-nine allies, perhaps prepared by an informal
high-level group of experts drawing on Freedom House data. The NATO
Parliamentary Assembly and coalitions of allies can amplify the message.43
To increase pressure, NATO could suspend hosting of visits, official meetings
and even military exercises with these nations. In severe cases, NATO
infrastructure spending and even access to military schools and information
sharing could be affected. An indirect way to express concern among allies
is to increase the prominence of core democratic values when considering
NATO enlargement decisions in the future.44 None of these steps is without
political cost and risk, even if calibrated carefully. But the costs and risks of
the gradual erosion of Alliance cohesion as member states drift from the
founding values are even greater. NATO cannot expect to remain coherent
and relevant and able to address the full range of challenges it faces, if it
ignores the internal drift from democracy within some member states. This
drift is a fundamental issue for the Alliance.45
22 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Streamlining NATO Decision-Making
Finally, the challenges facing NATO today demand more flexibility in executive
decision-making. As a core principle in preserving NATO cohesion,
consensus decision-making must remain the basis for major NATO
actions.46 The Treaty requirements for consensus on collective defense
decisions (Article 5) and enlargement decisions (Article 10) remain sensible.
Major policy decisions like the Defense Investment Pledge or the
creation of the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force rapid reaction capabilities
require consensus. But today with NATO enlarged to twenty-nine
members and facing increasingly diverse and complex challenges, it is time
to consider how other, more routine, administrative decisions can be taken
more efficiently. But this should be a management function, not derogation
from the consensus principle.
We recommend strengthening the Secretary General’s role as the chief executive
of the Alliance with broader authority to carry out routine business
without seeking consensus among the twenty-nine members. For example,
the Secretary General should consult allies on matters such as agendas and
timings of Ministerial Council meetings, but not be required to seek consensus
agreement. Today the agenda and even the dates of a Foreign Minister meeting
Jens Stoltenberg chairing his first meeting of the North Atlantic Council as NATO Secretary
General, October 1, 2014. (NATO Photo)
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 23
or a NATO-Russia Council meeting can consume hours of formal Council
time seeking consensus at the ambassadorial level, consuming headquarters’
bandwidth and crowding out more substantive and urgent topics, including
many outlined in this paper. Further, the Secretary General’s flexibility on
international staff personnel changes and NATO budget matters should be
increased. Today, for example, the Secretary General is severely constrained
from adapting the Alliance to emerging challenges by making meaningful
shifts in personnel and budgetary resources.47 While nations will continue to
want a critical role in all these decisions, criteria should be developed that will
provide for more flexibility while ensuring that all allies gain a fair share of
opportunities and allocation of resources.
A related problem is the tendency of some allies to bring into the Alliance
bilateral issues that impede progress on collective issues of the Alliance. As
an example, an ally might hold up agreement on the entire NATO military
exercise program because of an unrelated bilateral dispute with a NATO
partner who wishes to participate in an exercise.48 This practice erodes
Alliance cohesion and should not be permitted. After appropriate consultation,
we recommend the Secretary General should have the authority to
exclude such external issues from consideration in the Alliance, even if it
means moving forward without full consensus.
Speeding up decision-making in a crisis also deserves attention, especially
considering hybrid warfare scenarios that are designed to be ambiguous,
complicate attribution and delay decisions. While preserving political
control for actual employment of forces, the Alliance should authorize the
Supreme Allied Commander for Europe (SACEUR) to alert, prepare and
stage forces based on intelligence indicators and while consulting NATO
civilian authorities. Such delegated authorities are required, because the
Alliance today relies on rapid reinforcement of modest forces based forward,
and can contribute to deterrence and be overseen by political authorities.49
24 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Challenges from Beyond NATO’s Borders
Containing Putin’s Russia
Geography still matters. Russia—NATO’s largest, most militarily capable
neighbor—remains NATO’s principal external challenge. Russia under
President Putin ignores international commitments; violates Ukrainian,
Georgian and Moldovan sovereignty; conducts provocative exercises and
maneuvers along NATO’s borders; expands military activity in the Arctic
and North Atlantic; intervenes in parts of the Middle East against Western
interests; and interferes in democratic processes within members of the
Alliance, aspiring members and partners.50 President Putin’s objectives
seem clear: secure his leadership position within Russia and prevent
regime change; undermine the international rules-based order in favor of
a Europe re-divided into spheres of influence; assert increasing influence
on the Russian periphery, especially in Ukraine and Georgia, to prevent the
success of democratic, pro-European governments whose example could
undermine his own kleptocratic system; seize every opportunity to erode
the cohesion of NATO and the EU; and widen divisions within individual
member states.51
Pro-Russian rebels ride on a tank flying Russia’s flag, on a road east of Donetsk, Ukraine,
Monday, July 21, 2014. (AP Photo/Vadim Ghirda)
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 25
NATO should continue to rely on a two-track approach to counter and
contain President Putin’s Russia: deterrence and dialogue.52 Deterrence must
cover a spectrum of threats against NATO from nuclear, to conventional, to
hybrid warfare. NATO is most familiar with and most capable in the nuclear
and conventional realms. In these realms the Alliance has taken prudent
steps since 2014 to bolster deterrence, especially with the forward deployment
of ground forces to allies on the eastern flank in the Baltics and Poland,
enhancements to rapid response forces, revisions to the command structure
and a more robust exercise program.53 These efforts must be sustained.
NATO’s current rotational troop deployments in the Baltics and Poland
should be sustained indefinitely without gaps while adding appropriate
enabling capabilities.54 Priorities for the future include increasing readiness
of reinforcing conventional forces; filling capability gaps in high-end
conventional enablers such as precision strike, intelligence-surveillance-reconnaissance
and air-missile defense; and ensuring protocols are in place
to access both national strategic nuclear and offensive cyber capabilities.55
Most recently the NATO Readiness Initiative aims to provide 30 ready battle
groups, air squadrons and naval combatants in 30 days; now this policy must
be implemented.56 In the Baltics, deterrence can be bolstered by focusing on
the fielding of portable anti-armor and anti-air systems, along with training
specialists qualified in directing precision air support. The essence of NATO
deterrence of Russia remains the United States’ unquestioned commitment
to Article 5, up to and including extended nuclear deterrence.57 This reality
underlines the importance of stronger American presidential leadership
highlighted at the outset of this report.
(NATO)
26 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Deterrence of hybrid, or sub-conventional, attack demands urgent attention.
NATO is vulnerable to means short of Article 5’s “armed attack”
including by cyber attacks, intimidation by threatening energy cut-offs,
political subversion by covert agents and funding, disinformation campaigns
and election interference.58 Russia has already attacked NATO
members in this realm. Examples include the 2007 cyber attack on Estonia,
and interference in 2016 elections in France, the United States and the
United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum.59 NATO allies must invest in building
national resilience—the ability to resist such measures and to respond
effectively if an attack occurs. The idea of resilience is not new: Article 3
of the Treaty commits allies to “…develop their individual and collective
capacity to resist armed attack.”60 Today this mandate must extend below
the classic Article 5 threshold where Russia is most likely to attack.
Deterrence of hybrid attack, however, is vastly more complex than traditional
deterrence. Deterrence can be achieved by denying an attacker’s
ability to attain objectives and by increasing the risk of unacceptable
punishment for an attack.61 Hybrid tactics challenge both forms of deterrence.
National capabilities required to deny hybrid objectives extend well
beyond traditional defense and are dispersed among other elements of the
government at multiple levels and even the private sector, complicating
integration and coordination. Cybersecurity and election security illustrate
this point. Further, while the first responsibility for resilience lies with
states, both NATO and the EU have a responsibility to back up member
states, yet lines of authority between these multilateral institutions and
member states may not be clear, common standards are not established and
sharing classified information remains a persistent challenge.62 Deterring
by promising punishment requires clarity on the origin of the attack.
Hybrid attacks, however, are designed to be ambiguous, complicate attribution
and shield the attacker from punishment. As we have seen in Ukraine,
ambiguity and difficulty of attribution stressed Alliance decision-making
and risked paralysis while Russia established facts on the ground that are
hard to reverse. Finally, deterring hybrid attacks is connected to the drift
from NATO’s core values discussed in this report. Moving away from
common democratic values opens vulnerabilities for Russian attacks that
aim to erode the cohesion of the Alliance by exploiting political divisions
within and among allies.63
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 27
As a start, NATO should define standards for national resilience and clarify
shared responsibilities for deterring hybrid attacks.64 The Alliance should
be a leader in the global effort to adapt traditional deterrence principles
to the cyber realm. Exercises that focus on hybrid attacks, including at
the level of ministers, can illustrate the deterrence challenge and lead to
refined policies. NATO could bring together ministers of defense, ministers
of interior and national intelligence officials to increase the value of such
exercises. NATO and the EU should coordinate common standards in
member states, with priority on cybersecurity, election security and countering
disinformation. A priority should be placed on publicly disclosing
the nature and source of hybrid attacks. Russia must be held to account,
not allowed to deny, obfuscate and hide in the shadows. In the longer
term, diversifying energy sources and fully assimilating Russian-speaking
minority populations should be addressed as vulnerabilities that Russia
could exploit.65
Allies must continue bolstering deterrence by ensuring consequences for
Russian actions. Recent examples include sustaining U.S.-Canadian-EU
economic sanctions five years after Russian aggression in Ukraine, the
Netherlands’ public commitment to holding Russia accountable for its
role in the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in 2014 and
the responses after the Novichok chemical agent attacks in the U.K. 66
Going forward, the U.S. and the EU together must never recognize the
illegal annexation of Crimea and reaffirm economic sanctions will stay
on Moscow for as long as it occupies Ukrainian territory. These measures,
however, have not changed Russian behavior. Even less impressive are the
reactions to Russian interference in elections and recent aggression in the
Black Sea and denial of Ukrainian access to the Sea of Azov.67
While confronting Russian aggression and bolstering deterrence, NATO must
remain open to dialogue with Russia when it is in the West’s interest. Russia is
a major European power that must be taken into account.68 First, dialogue is
fundamental to deterrence, as Russia must clearly understand NATO’s intent
and the consequences of aggression. Second, even in a period of increased
tensions, there are topics for dialogue that serve common interests. The NATORussia
Council should continue to meet regularly to address risk reduction
measures, provide transparency on military exercises and exchange views on
28 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
priority political issues, including the conflict in Ukraine. Allies should press
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to update the
Vienna Document to improve predictability and transparency of conventional
forces in the region.69 Russia should return an ambassador to NATO and NATO
should re-open military-military contacts below the four-star level. It is not
in NATO’s interest that the Russian military liaison cell at Allied Command
Operations’ SHAPE remains closed. Third, balancing deterrence and dialogue
is essential to sustaining political cohesion among allies some of whom have
differing perspectives on the nature of the Russian threat and the best responses
to it.70 NATO should not return to “business as usual” with Russia as before
2014, but restricting dialogue is not an effective form of punishment. In periods
of increased tension, the risk of accident and unintended consequences
increases—dialogue can mitigate some of that risk. In short, sustaining and even
expanding dialogue with Russia is in NATO’s interest.
Arms control remains an important goal of real dialogue with Russia. Even
during the height of the Cold War, U.S.-Russian agreements, while imperfect,
reduced weapons stockpiles, improved stability and were the basis of a degree
of trust.71 The Russian violation of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty is a serious setback and threatens the “fabric” of arms control
agreements that have contributed to security for decades.72 First, the United
States should not abrogate the Treaty, as this step diverts attention from the
Russian violation and is not required by the United States to counter the
Russian deployment. Even now that the U.S. has begun the six-month process
of withdrawing, every effort must be made to preserve the Treaty using
diplomacy to hold Russia accountable and bring it back into compliance. The
U.S. should continue to explore every diplomatic angle, while continuously
consulting allies at every step. For example, the parties should explore more
fully reciprocal on-site inspections for Russia at the NATO ballistic missile
defense sites and for the U.S. at Russian cruise missile sites.73 Such negotiations
would not be simple or quick, but are worth the effort considering the severe
impact of losing the INF Treaty. Another potential diplomatic approach is
to begin discussions to broaden the Treaty to include China, which has INF
systems of concern to both Russia and the U.S. Especially with the renewal of
the New START Treaty in 2021, now is the time to use every tool to preserve
and even extend arms control agreements. NATO should stand united in support
of American diplomacy to sustain arms control with Russia by exploring
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 29
new measures to prevent a renewed arms race that would be destabilizing and
expensive. The alternative is that in two years there may be no arms control
treaties with Russia for the first time in over 50 years.
Russia is unlikely to change in the near- to mid-term. President Putin will
be in power at least until 2024. His successor will face the same declining
power indicators—economic, social-political, demographic and health—
likely requiring centralized power in the Kremlin, rallying nationalism
against NATO as an enemy and seeking to control the periphery, especially
neighboring states that move toward democracy and the West.74 For these
reasons, NATO must take a long view toward Russia, containing President
Putin, investing in the twin pillars of deterrence and dialogue, while contending
with multiple other challenges.
Ending the Afghan War
NATO has led the international military coalition in Afghanistan
beginning in 2003, making it the Alliance’s largest and longest combat
operation.75 Today the roughly 17,000 coalition troops from thirty-nine
nations demonstrate NATO’s adaptability, cohesion and staying power.76
But it is time to reconsider this mission. The fight against the Taliban is a
military stalemate. Afghans are the second largest refugee population in
the world.77 Afghan civilian and security forces casualties are at all-time
highs.78 Coalition bombing is also at a peak.79 The war in Afghanistan may
The U.S. Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation, Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad
meets with NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, December 2018. (NATO Photo)
30 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
be approaching a political turning point as the Afghan government, the
U.S. and others engage the Taliban to end the conflict.80
The Trump administration is right to be engaging the Taliban directly to
explore a political process to end the war. NATO should prioritize this
political effort, subordinating the military campaign to a supporting role.
Only a political settlement among Afghans—including the elected Afghan
government and the Taliban—will provide a durable, sustainable outcome
that secures NATO’s mission to prevent Afghanistan from again becoming
a terrorist safe haven.81 The outline of a compromise may be within reach:
the Taliban breaks ties with al-Qa’ida, ends the insurgency and attains a
share of political power; an inclusive, elected government governs under
the framework of the Constitution; neighboring states benefit from a
stable Afghanistan and agree not to interfere; and the NATO-led coalition
achieves its original mission of denying safe haven to al-Qa’ida. The
diplomatic process will be difficult and likely prolonged. The U.S. should
proceed slowly and carefully, conditioning troop withdrawals on the
Taliban’s meeting agreed security and political benchmarks, beginning
with a ceasefire and including engaging with the Afghan government.
Verification and enforcement of a deal will be major challenges. NATO’s
main role will be to sustain its support for the Afghan security forces,
denying Taliban efforts to gain influence at the bargaining table by military
means. Especially during this shift to diplomacy, any changes in coalition
force posture must be linked to the talks and made in concert with the
Alliance as a whole. NATO allies should adhere to the “in together, out
together” principle, avoiding unilateral national withdrawals that would
undermine the diplomatic effort, the confidence of Afghan partners and
Alliance cohesion.82 Even after a settlement, Afghanistan will require financial
support indefinitely, or face state collapse. NATO allies and the EU
should prepare now to lead the international effort to financially sustain
the Afghan government and its security forces in the years ahead.83
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 31
Refocusing NATO’s Partnerships
NATO’s partnership program began with the North Atlantic Cooperation
Council (NACC) in 1991 and Partnership for Peace in 1994, reaching out
to the former Warsaw Pact states and Soviet republics to help stabilize
their transitions, prepare for possible NATO membership and serve as
a substitute for those that would not join, perhaps ever. Thirteen former
partners, of course, became NATO members. Today forty-one states
are formal NATO partners, ranging geographically from Mauritania in
Western Africa to Japan, many with diplomatic representatives at NATO
Headquarters.84 NATO demonstrates democratic values and military standards
to its partners while gaining political insight and military support
from a diverse array of states. Partners vary politically and in military
capability too, with close partners like Sweden, Finland and Australia
adding significantly to NATO operations and exercises. The basic premise
is sound: if NATO’s neighbors are stable, then NATO is more secure.85
Today, however, NATO’s neighborhood is anything but stable. Instability
among partner states runs along most of NATO’s periphery in Central and
Eastern Europe, the Balkans, the Middle East and across North Africa.
Along this “arc of instability” weak states struggle with frozen conflicts,
terrorists inspire strikes on NATO capitals and migration challenges allies’
ability to cope and can be used as an excuse to drift further from NATO’s
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg and EU High Representative/Vice President Federica
Mogherini following the meeting of the North Atlantic Council, December 2017. (NATO Photo)
32 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
values. Beyond the value of political consultations, the current partnership
program does little to improve the situation.86
It is time to recast NATO’s partnerships to better serve NATO’s interests. In
practice, the programs suffer from two inter-related limitations: too few
resources and too little focus. NATO invests insufficient resources to promote
stability and effect meaningful change even among priority partners. Less than
1 percent of NATO’s common funding budget, or about $20 million annually,
goes to partner programs. This means that NATO’s impact on regional stability
is minimal, even in priority partner states like Ukraine, Georgia, Jordan, Iraq
and Tunisia.87 NATO must rely on member states’ national contributions,
sometimes placed under a NATO flag, while most members run their own
assistance programs. NATO’s common budget is unlikely to increase. We recommend
another approach. NATO should serve as a clearinghouse for
security-related national assistance programs among its member states. NATO
would convene allies interested in assisting partner states and promote the
sharing of information of national assistance programs. NATO’s role would be
to promote transparency and improve effectiveness by exposing gaps, seams
and redundancies. Such an effort would be completely voluntary for allies and
some may prefer not to participate or to share only partial information on their
programs. Nonetheless, any gains in effectiveness among allies would likely be
more impactful than the current minute resources from NATO itself.
Migrants sit in a rubber dinghy after Proactiva Open Arms, a Spanish NGO, spotted and rescued
them in the Central Mediterranean Sea at 45 miles (72 kilometers) from Al Khums, Libya,
December 21, 2018. (AP Photo/Olmo Calvo)
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 33
Further, NATO should shift the focus of its partnership efforts from individual
states to regional international organizations. The European Union is the
most natural partner for NATO, sharing core values, twenty-two member
states and geographic focus. The EU is NATO’s most critical strategic partner.
88 While much has been accomplished with the EU, there is much greater
potential for enhancing NATO’s mission by coordinating further with the
EU than by engaging any other combination of the current forty partner
states.89 Prime topics include developing complementary defense capabilities
while avoiding duplication, countering hybrid tactics especially focusing
on cybersecurity and conducting joint exercises to improve coordination.
NATO should do much more to support ongoing EU operations to contend
with migration from Africa and the Middle East—the critical challenge in
Europe that destabilizes governments, inflames populism and erodes the solidarity
of the EU. For example, NATO could support the EU with high-end
surveillance aircraft to provide early warning of migration flows in North
Africa and the Sahel. Much more can be done to share and fuse information
between the two institutions to improve crisis awareness and response times.
NATO and the EU should collaborate on assistance to enhance stability
along Europe’s periphery.
NATO’s comparative advantage is providing multinational institutions a
model for security cooperation: values, structures and procedures. Beyond
the EU, NATO could seek partnerships with the African Union, the Arab
League and the Gulf Cooperation Council, all of which could benefit from
NATO’s experience in building a durable political institution and framework
for regional military cooperation. Such institutional partnerships
would not have to replace NATO’s current state partnerships, but over time
could significantly increase the impact NATO has beyond its borders.
34 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Maintaining an Open Door to Future Members
Article 10 of the Washington Treaty is clear: any
European state may aspire to NATO membership.
Given the range of strategic challenges facing the
Alliance outlined in this report, however, the priority
should be on consolidating Alliance cohesion after
the historic enlargement of the past two decades,
rather than taking on new members in the short term.
The addition of thirteen members since the end of
the Cold War was right on strategic grounds. The
desire for membership in NATO led many European
countries to reform their political systems, resolve
differences with neighbors and meet other conditions
for membership that advance the NATO Treaty’s aims of peace, security and
shared values.90 North Macedonia, just beginning the formal accession process
to become NATO’s thirtieth member, is the most recent example. The
door to membership must remain open. The Treaty specifies that aspirants
must “further the principles” of the treaty and “contribute to the security”
of the Alliance.91 Especially in the current security environment, these are
high standards. In purely military terms, security on NATO’s flanks may be
improved with new allies in the Nordic region and in the Western Balkans—
but NATO’s most significant challenge is not flank security. For Georgia and
Ukraine in particular, the door is open, there is a path, but this may be a
long journey. NATO must remain firm with its position: no one outside the
Alliance has a vote or veto on enlargement.92 In the longer run, NATO may
add new members, but the “unanimous agreement” among current allies
required by the Treaty does not exist today, so pressing enlargement now
would only erode NATO’s internal cohesion—cohesion required to contend
with all the other challenges at hand.
“The Parties may, by
unanimous agreement,
invite any other
European State in a
position to further
the principles of
this Treaty and
to contribute to
the security of
the North Atlantic
area to accede to
this Treaty.”
— Article 10,
Washington Treaty
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 35
Challenges on the Horizon
Winning the Technology Battle in the Digital Age
Mid-term developments in digital technologies threaten to undermine NATO’s
current military and intelligence advantages. The U.S. and China are in direct
competition to develop new technologies—especially artificial intelligence
(AI), cyber, robotics, quantum computing and biotechnology—that may well
revolutionize warfare.93 The combination of these technologies may rival
earlier advances like satellite-based navigation and even nuclear weapons.94
Quantum computing, for example, will be a game-changer for the security of
intelligence, cyber networks and communications, including systems on which
the NATO command structure and nuclear command and control depend.95
Civilian and military communications that rely on 5G mobile phone networks
will face new vulnerabilities.96 While NATO relies on individual allies to incorporate
such technologies in their national defense capabilities, now is the time
to assess how these will impact NATO’s ability to fight together in the future.97
Even if some NATO allies master these technologies, not all allies will do so at
the same pace, eroding decades of work to build interoperability.98 The Alliance
may soon face an even greater separation between its most capable allies and
the others, a divide between the haves and the have-nots.
Now is the time to adapt the NATO Defense Planning Process to account for
these new technologies. The current four-year process—that begins with agreed
political guidance, considers scenarios and results in capability targets for each
ally99—is insufficiently agile to contend with rapid and fundamental technological
change. NATO’s Allied Command Transformation in Norfolk, Virginia,
should lead now an in-depth assessment of the potential impact of these
changes on NATO’s war-fighting capabilities. Allies should increase spending to
acquire these emerging technologies lest China and Russia gain a critical advantage
in the next decade. As a subset of overall defense spending, NATO should
track national investments in these areas. The most technologically capable
allies also have a responsibility to consider these impacts. The U.S. should work
alongside NATO allies to integrate with them these new technologies.
36 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Competing with China
China will not likely pose a military
threat to Europe in the foreseeable
future, but its inexorable economic
growth as well as its efforts to undermine
the international rules-based
order present other challenges that
NATO should begin to assess. China,
of course, is the main competitor of
the U.S. in developing the emerging
defense technologies. More
immediate is the impact of Chinese
commercial investment in European
transportation and communications
infrastructure.100 China’s annual
foreign direct investment in Europe
grew to $42 billion in 2017, a huge
increase from $840 million invested in 2008.101 Total Chinese investments
in Europe amount to $318 billion, 45 percent more than Chinese investment
in the U.S. between 2008 and 2017. It is clear that one of the primary
destinations of China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is the European
market of over 500 million people and over 25 percent of global GDP.102
China focuses particularly on infrastructure in Eastern Europe that can
solidify links between Europe and BRI projects further east.103 China also
invests in the opening of Arctic Sea channels to the west.104
Chinese commercial in-roads today can lead to political influence, as seen
already in some EU decisions.105 For example, in June 2017, Greece vetoed
an EU statement at the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) regarding
China’s human rights violations, marking the first time the EU had failed
to make a joint statement at the UNHRC.106 In March 2017, Hungary
derailed EU consensus by refusing to sign a joint letter denouncing the
reported torture of detained lawyers in China.107 Such political influence
can widen divisions among European allies, eroding NATO’s and the EU’s
political cohesion. NATO should anticipate that increased Chinese military
presence will eventually follow commercial and political inroads.
Source: “Chinese investment in
Europe is increasing,” The Economist,
October 18, 2018. www.economist.
com/graphic-detail/2018/10/10/
chinese-investment-in-europe-is-increasing
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 37
To begin to contend with this looming challenge, NATO should expand
and deepen its military and political cooperation with its partners and
America’s allies in East Asia. Japan, South Korea, Australia and New
Zealand—already NATO partners—understand China and its strategies
and can help the Alliance assess this challenge. The U.S. and Canada
should work much more closely with European allies to develop common
strategies toward China—political, economic and security—underlining
the importance of the trans-Atlantic alliance as a strategic advantage that
China cannot match. Within NATO, more attention
should be paid to China’s economic
development funding that can lead to political
influence, both among allies and on NATO’s
periphery. China should be a priority topic for
NATO-EU consultations. More specifically, NATO
should welcome recent EU initiatives to implement
measures to control foreign investment, similar to the Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS). 108
Most important, on the scale of grand strategy, the rising challenge from China
underlines the enduring importance of the NATO alliance. The defining
geo-strategic contest of the 21st century will be between the U.S. and China,
which will play out in political, economic and perhaps military dimensions.
Both Europe and America are best postured for this competition inside a
strong, cohesive NATO that balances the security burden equitably and enables
the U.S. increasingly to focus on China. This looming strategic reality amplifies
the recommendations of this report. NATO, the trans-Atlantic bond, will
become even more important as China’s power grows. The goal is to live and
work with China where possible but to compete to maintain the primacy of the
free, democratic countries in both Europe and the Indo-Pacific.
“The Parties will...
encourage economic
collaboration between
any or all of them.”
— Article 2,
Washington Treaty
38 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Meeting the Challenges
Against this imposing set of issues, NATO should adapt a “back to basics”
approach. First, back to basics means focusing on the two fundamentals
highlighted throughout this report: American leadership and Alliance
cohesion. As stated at the report’s outset, the single greatest challenge today
is the need to renew U.S. presidential leadership. But NATO cannot sit in
a holding pattern, simply waiting for the next American president. The
stage must be set now for a time when the U.S. not only continues to lead
from the front with its actions, but also restores trust that has eroded under
President Trump. Further, much can be done to strengthen NATO, including
alliance cohesion, in the next two years under the strong leadership
of Secretary General Stoltenberg and other NATO civilian and military
leaders. When the time is right, with renewed American leadership, the
challenges outlined here should be addressed in a revision of the Strategic
Concept—after the North Atlantic Treaty—the fundamental policy document
guiding the Alliance. The current document dates to 2010 and was
drafted in a much different European and global security environment.109
Alliance cohesion remains a key element and a revised Concept will help
strengthen cohesion. Cohesion enables NATO’s major decisions requiring
consensus: notable are invoking Article 5, increasing military capabilities
and deployments, adding new members and adapting major policies.
Alliance cohesion is the product of shared values and unquestioned commitment
to Article 5. These are the essence of NATO and must be guarded
vigilantly. In short, with renewed American leadership and Alliance cohesion,
NATO certainly can adapt, remain relevant and continue as a pillar of
international security as it enters its eighth decade.
Second, it is important to remember that today is not the first time in
NATO’s long history that it faces such fundamental challenges. The
Alliance should draw strength from its past. With the fall of the Berlin Wall
in 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union two years later, forty-five
years of Cold War came to an end. At this strategic inflection point
NATO confronted the existential question of what its purpose should be.
Under the leadership of U.S. President George H. W. Bush, U.K. Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and
French President François Mitterrand, the Alliance adopted the vision
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 39
of a Europe “whole, free and at peace.”110 NATO
later welcomed to its ranks Central and Eastern
European states newly free to choose their own
path, while deepening its partnership with Russia
under the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act and 2002
Rome Declaration. As a result, one hundred million
Europeans became NATO citizens as thirteen new
member states joined the Alliance.111 The EU, too,
added members on a path parallel to NATO’s. NATO
also welcomed over forty states as partners, offering
political consultations and military standards to states outside the Alliance.112
On the military front, NATO shifted attention to stability on its periphery,
initially to the Balkans, bringing peace to Bosnia and later Kosovo.113
Then after the al-Qa’ida attacks on the United States on 9/11, NATO took
the historic decision to invoke Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, the
following day declaring that the attack on America was considered an
attack on all allies. Within twenty-four hours of the attacks, the Alliance—
formed more than fifty years earlier to bring the United States to defend
Europe against an attack by the Soviet Union—brought European allies
to help defend the United States against an attack by a non-state terrorist
group.114 In the aftermath of 9/11 and U.S. intervention against al-Qai’da
and its Taliban enablers in Afghanistan, NATO later reinforced the United
States in the effort to forestall security threats from that country and to
try creating a better security and political future. NATO remains together
there today, seventeen years later, with allies and partners who lost over
1,000 soldiers alongside 2,350 Americans.115 There is no clearer evidence
of NATO’s ability to adapt to changes in the security setting and no clearer
evidence of the political durability of an alliance founded on common
values and principles.
Beginning in 2014, twenty-five years after the end of the Cold War, NATO again
saw fundamental shifts in the security setting challenging the NATO alliance.
In the first six months of that year, President Putin’s Russia seized and illegally
annexed Crimea, a part of sovereign Ukraine. This is the first time since the end
of World War II that one European state had seized territory of another by force,
violating the United Nations Charter, the Helsinki Final Act, the Bucharest
“Let Europe be
whole and free.
To the founders of
the alliance, this
aspiration was a
distant dream, and
now it’s the new
mission of NATO.”
— President George H.W. Bush
Mainz, Federal Republic of
Germany, May 31, 1989
40 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Memorandum and the NATO-Russia Founding Act. President Putin had
thrown out the rulebook that had governed security in Europe for a generation.
Weeks after Crimea, Russian-supported separatists destabilized two provinces
in eastern Ukraine, with Russia providing overt military support in an effort to
end Ukraine’s alignment with the European Union and NATO.116
In June 2014, the so-called Islamic State declared a caliphate across northern
Syria and Iraq, along Turkey’s—and NATO’s—southern border. This move
worsened the tragic civil war in Syria and sparked Islamic State-inspired
terrorist attacks in European cities and a flood of refugees from the war
zone into Europe.117 In 2015 and 2016, migration into Europe from the
Middle East and Africa spiked, posing existential challenges to European
democracies and the European Union.118 The security setting had changed
dramatically, presenting NATO its second strategic inflection point, comparable
only to the end of the Cold War in 1989-1991. NATO weathered earlier
crises, including Suez in 1956, theater nuclear force debates in the 1980s, the
Balkan fighting in the 1990s and the Iraq War in 2003. None of these, however,
rose to the scale and scope of today’s challenges.
Today, even as the Alliance continues to come to grips with these recent
events to the east and to the south, new challenges emerge, both from
within the Alliance and from beyond, leaving allies on both sides of the
Atlantic to consider the way forward. As NATO stands today at a new historic
inflection point, its leaders should draw strength and confidence from
the post-Cold War experience. In the period following 1989-1991, NATO
faced fundamental challenges and adapted. NATO has been tested before
and emerged reshaped, revitalized and refocused.
Finally, for Americans especially, “back to basics” means remembering
why they should value NATO. Americans need to remember that NATO
is in America’s vital national interest.119 Recently, President Trump has
charged that over the years NATO allies have taken advantage of America
and past administrations of both parties have supported NATO because
of misplaced generosity, altruism and naiveté.120 This narrative is false
and dangerous. In fact, Americans learned the perils of disengagement
from Europe in the years leading up to World War II and, following that
terrible conflict, committed to sustained involvement with a strong Europe
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 41
as the best way to advance America’s own interests. This worked: for the
past seventy-plus years, Europe has been at peace, secured by NATO, and
both America and Europe have prospered as a result.121 With stability
and predictability underpinned by NATO, individual nations and collective
effort—notably what is today the European Union—produced a
miracle without precedent. The trans-Atlantic economy is the largest and
most integrated in the world, accounting for 46 percent of global GDP,
11 percent of world population, one-third of goods traded, over half of
global foreign direct investment and the highest level of cross-border data
flows.122 Europe and America are each other’s largest trading partners and
each other’s largest sources of foreign direct investment.123 NATO’s military
power protects and buttresses these economic ties.
Politically, too, America benefits from the Alliance. In Europe and Canada,
the United States enjoys more treaty allies than in any other region of the
world. The twenty-nine NATO allies, bound together by common democratic
values, are a powerful political bloc on the world stage, the place to
start when forming political coalitions to address global problems. This
political strength begins with the values found in the second sentence of the
NATO Treaty: democracy, individual liberty and rule of law.124 NATO allies
are three of five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council,
six of seven members of the G7 and seven members of the G20. Political
cohesion translates into political staying power: consider NATO’s continued
engagement in the Balkans more than twenty years after the 1995 intervention,
or the forty-nation NATO-based coalition in Afghanistan seventeen
years after 9/11. NATO allies know one another well, each with a permanent
diplomatic mission under one roof at NATO Headquarters in Brussels and
with five annual meetings of foreign and defense ministers, a firm foundation
for trusting political engagement. Allies do not always agree on political
issues, of course, but NATO provides a forum for regular consultations and a
starting point to address common problems.
As a military alliance, NATO’s most important contribution to American
interests is security. Above all, NATO has helped keep the peace in Europe
after centuries of division and war. NATO has invested for decades in the
ability of its members to operate together—so-called “interoperability”—
based on practiced procedures, common standards and NATO’s
42 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
historically unique integrated military command structure. Many of
NATO’s partners also share in this interoperability. This military potential
means that when America faces security challenges anywhere, it has ready
teammates based on NATO, either with the Alliance as a collective whole
or with select allies to form a purpose-built military coalition. Further,
NATO allies provide America basing and access rights across Europe;
bringing U.S. forces a continent closer to trouble spots in the Middle East,
Africa and beyond, and providing improved response times and sustainability.
Bases like Lakenheath in the U.K., Ramstein in Germany, Aviano in
Italy, Rota in Spain, Souda Bay in Greece and İncirlik in Turkey are strategic
assets. NATO allies employ tens of thousands of intelligence personnel,
extending the reach of the United States’ eyes and ears.125 In short, NATO
reinforces America’s national military strength with increased scale, diversity
and geographic position.
NATO is not perfect. This report addresses the array of significant challenges
the Alliance must face. At heart, however, Americans must remember that
a Europe “whole, free and at peace” is fundamentally in the U.S. interest
and NATO is America’s primary bridge across the
Atlantic.126 In fact, most Americans continue to
support NATO overwhelmingly.127 America by itself
enjoys great human capital, vast resources and favorable
geographic position. Together with its allies,
both in NATO and in East Asia, America holds
an unmatched geo-strategic advantage over any
potential competitor, today and for the foreseeable
future. America’s main strategic competitors, China
and Russia, do not compare. Sustaining this strategic
advantage by nurturing and investing in alliances,
beginning with NATO, is therefore in America’s vital
national interest. Allies are the ultimate guarantee of
American security and prosperity.
“Three quarters of
Americans favor
maintaining or
increasing the US
commitment to NATO,
and nearly one
in five Americans
want to see that
commitment increased
– the highest
level of support
ever surveyed.”
— Chicago Council on Global
Affairs, 2018
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 43
Conclusion
This report outlines a daunting array of challenges facing NATO. The scale
and scope of today’s challenges combine to mark dramatic change—a strategic
inflection point—unlike any moment in NATO history except 1989-1991.
The end of the Cold War, however, was a time of promise and optimism. In
sharp contrast, today the trend lines are negative. NATO faces a crisis, with
severe challenges from both within and beyond. The fundamental question
now is whether the Alliance can adapt to contend with the dramatic changes
in the security environment and remain relevant. The need for action is
urgent. Just maintaining the status quo would spell failure. Renewing U.S.
presidential leadership is a crucial requirement. U.S. congressional support
for protecting and extending NATO as a vital U.S. national interest is key.
Allies, too, must step up to provide the resources required, share in Alliance
leadership and commitment and sustain Alliance cohesion.
We hope this report serves as food for thought within the Alliance,
prompting a focused look at tough issues, including some requiring deep
introspection among allies themselves. At the Alliance’s seventieth birthday,
the NATO allies must individually and collectively be mature and
confident enough to look at themselves in the mirror, assess challenges and
weaknesses and hold themselves accountable. As the world’s premier security
institution, NATO proved resilient in the past and continues to provide
unmatched value for its members today.
44 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
Endnotes
1 Donald Trump, “Remarks by President Trump at NATO Unveiling of the Article 5 and Berlin Wall
Memorials – Brussels, Belgium,” May 25, 2017, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/
remarks-president-trump-nato-unveiling-article-5-berlin-wall-memorials-brussels-belgium/.
2 Former Ambassador to NATO Robert Hunter argues that while President Trump is indeed fostering
uncertainty about the U.S. commitment to Europe, his words and deeds represent less of a break
from the past and more of an acceleration of the shift in U.S. engagement in and with Europe seen
under George W. Bush and Barack Obama administrations, who shifted U.S. attention significantly
away from Europe toward the Middle East and Asia. See Robert Hunter, “Trump in Europe: Reinforcing
His Predecessors’ Errors,” LobeLog, June 1, 2017, http://lobelog.com/trump-in-europe-reinforcing-
his-predecessors-errors/.
3 See, for example, Thomas Schelling, The Strategy of Conflict (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1960); Thomas Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1966); André Beaufre, Deterrence and Strategy (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1966); Lawrence
Freedman, Deterrence (London, U.K.: Polity, 2004); and Glenn H. Snyder, Deterrence by Denial and
Punishment (Princeton, NJ: Center of International Studies, January 1959).
4 United States Congress, Senate, A resolution expressing the unwavering commitment of the United
States to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, S Res. 54, 115th Congress, 1st sess., introduced in
Senate February 7, 2017, https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-resolution/54/
text; United States Congress, House, Expressing support for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, HR 256, 115th Congress, 1st sess., introduced
in House April 6, 2017, https://www.congress.gov/115/bills/hres256/BILLS- 115hres256ih.
pdf; “Shaheen & Tillis Announce Re-establishment of Senate NATO Observer Group,” Press
Release, February 28, 2018, https://www.shaheen.senate.gov/news/press/shaheen-and-tillis-announce-
re-establishment-of-senate-nato-observer-group; “Kaine, Gardner, Reed, McCain Introduce
Bill To Prevent The President From Leaving NATO,” Press Release, July 26, 2018, https://www.kaine.
senate.gov/press-releases/kaine-gardner-reed-mccain-introduce-bill-to-prevent-the-presidentfrom-
leaving-nato; United States Congress, Senate, A joint resolution requiring the advice and
consent of the Senate or an Act of Congress to suspend, terminate, or withdraw the United States
from the North Atlantic Treaty and authorizing related litigation, and for other purposes, S Res.
4, 116th Congress, 1st sess., introduced in Senate January 17, 2019, https://www.congress.gov/
bill/116th-congress/senate-joint-resolution/4; United States Congress, House, NATO Support
Act, HR 676, 116th Congress, 1st sess., introduced January 17, 2019, https://www.congress.gov/
bill/116th-congress/house-bill/676; The European Deterrence Initiative (EDI) funds U.S. rotational
troop deployments to Europe, participation in NATO exercises, prepositioning of heavy equipment
in Europe to promote rapid reinforcement, improvements in transportation infrastructure to
improve mobility of forces, and investments in allied defense capabilities especially in the Baltics.
See U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Undersecretary of Defense (Comptroller), European
Deterrence Initiative Department of Defense Budget FY 2019 (February 2018), https://comptroller.
defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2019/fy2019_EDI_JBook.pdf.
5 54 percent of Americans favor using U.S. troops if Russia invaded a NATO ally like Estonia, Latvia,
or Lithuania, while 42 percent oppose. See Dina Smeltz, Ivo Daalder, Karl Friedhoff, Craig Kafura,
Lily Wojtowicz, America Engaged: American Public Opinion and U.S. Foreign Policy (Chicago, IL:
Chicago Council on Global Affairs, 2018), https://www.thechicagocouncil.org/sites/default/files/
report_ccs18_america-engaged_181002.pdf, p. 20.
6 Germany, U.K., Italy, Poland, France and the Netherlands rank among the top ten largest diaspora
populations in the United States. See “America’s Largest Diaspora Populations,” International
Diaspora Engagement Alliance, accessed December 27, 2018, http://www.diasporaalliance.org/
americas-largest-diaspora-populations/.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 45
7 “Events,” NATO, accessed December 27, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/events.htm.
8 Anthony Blinken, “No People. No Process. No Policy,” The New York Times, January 28, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/28/opinion/trump-foreign-policy-crisis.html.
9 The House passed the NATO Support Act on January 22, 2019, which prohibits the appropriation or
use of funds to withdraw the United States from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. See NATO
Support Act, 2019.
10 “Wales Summit Declaration: Issued by the Heads of State and Government participating in the
meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Wales,” NATO, September 5, 2014, https://www.nato.int/
cps/en/natohq/official_texts_112964.htm.
11 “NATO Leaders Pledge Strong Support to Ukraine at Wales Summit,” NATO News, September 4,
2014, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_112459.htm.
12 “Defence Expenditure of NATO countries (2011-2018),” NATO Press Release PR/CP(2018)091,July
10, 2018, https://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/pdf_2018_07/20180709_180710-
pr2018-91-en.pdf.
13 There are two conceptually distinct forms of financial contribution to NATO: common funding
and national defense spending. The United States, whose economy represents roughly half of the
Alliance’s total Gross Domestic Product, contributes 22 percent of NATO common funding, with
the other 28 Allies providing the remaining 78 percent of the budget. See “Funding NATO,” NATO,
last updated June 27, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_67655.htm.
14 Julie Hirshfeld Davis, “Trump Warns NATO Allies to Spend More on Defense – Or Else,” The New
York Times, July 2, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/02/world/europe/trump-nato.html.
15 Allies could be pushed for an even higher level of ambition. See Alexander Vershbow, “European
Defense: Time for a Higher Ambition,” Lithuanian Foreign Policy Review, vol. 34 (2018), http://www.
eesc.lt/uploads/Lithuanian%20Foreign%20Policy%20Review%202018.pdf.
16 “Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2011-2018),” 2018.
17 “NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg following the meeting of the North Atlantic Council
at the level of Defence Ministers,” NATO, June 29, 2017, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/
opinions_145385.htm.
18 According to the SIPRI Military Expenditure Database: In millions of 2017 USD, European NATO
members spent $269,994, while China spent $228,231. However, comparing defense spending can
be deceptive due to the disparity in purchasing power. See “SIPRI Military Expenditure Database,”
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), accessed December 31, 2018, https://
www.sipri.org/databases/milex.
19 “Trends in World Military Expenditure, 2017,” SIPRI, May 2018, https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/
files/2018-05/sipri_fs_1805_milex_2017.pdf; “Global military spending remains high at $1.7 trillion,”
SIPRI, May 2, 2018, https://www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2018/global-military-spending-remains-
high-17-trillion.
20 NATO has developed eleven input and output metrics for individual NATO members, but this is
information that most allies prefer to keep hidden, aside from Denmark that has published the full
overview of all eleven indicators. See Garrett Martin and Balazs Martonffy, “Abandon the 2 Percent
Obsession: A New Rating For Pulling Your Weight in NATO,” War on the Rocks, May 19, 2017, https://
warontherocks.com/2017/05/abandon-the-2-percent-obsession-a-new-rating-for-pulling-yourweight-
in-nato/.
46 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
21 For example, in the defense expenditure data collected from allies on a regular basis, NATO
captures the distribution of defense expenditure by equipment, personnel, and infrastructure. See
“Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2011-2018),” 2018, p. 12-13.
22 Jordan Becker and Edmund Malesky. “The Continent or the ‘Grand Large’? Strategic Culture and
Operational Burden-Sharing in NATO” International Studies Quarterly 61 no. 1 (2017): p. 163-180.
23 “NATO defines defense expenditure as payments made by a national government specifically
to meet the needs of its armed forces, those of Allies or of the Alliance. A major component of
defense expenditure is payments on Armed Forces financed within the Ministry of Defence (MoD)
budget. Armed Forces include Land, Maritime and Air forces as well as Joint formations such as
Administration and Command, Special Operations Forces, Medical Service, Logistic Command
etc. They might also include ‘Other Forces’ like Ministry of Interior troops, national police forces,
gendarmerie, carabinieri, coast guards etc. In such cases, expenditure should be included only in
proportion to the forces that are trained in military tactics, are equipped as a military force, can
operate under direct military authority in deployed operations, and can, realistically, be deployed
outside national territory in support of a military force. Also, expenditure on Other Forces financed
through the budgets of ministries other than MoD should be included in defense expenditure.” See
“Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2011-2018),” 2018, p.14.
24 Security-relevant contributions that currently do not count towards the NATO defense budget
include: domestic counterterrorism, intelligence and cybersecurity of strategic civilian infrastructures.
See Elizabeth Braw, “The 2% Benchmark Is Blinding Us to NATO Members’ Actual
Contributions,” Defense One, October 12, 2017, https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2017/10/
benchmark-blinding-us-nato-members-contributions/141736/.
25 See, for example, Ben Hodges and Carsten Schmiedl, Targeting 2%: The Logistics of a More
Sophisticated Approach to Burdensharing (Washington, DC: Center for European Policy Analysis,
September 2018), https://www.cepa.org/targeting-2-percent, p. 6.
26 For example, Chairman of the Munich Security Conference Wolfgang Ischinger suggested that
the EU should “spend at least 3 percent of our GDP for crisis prevention, development assistance,
and defense… A holistic discussion of the necessary expenditures would truly benefit the public
discourse on foreign policy.” See Wolfgang Ischinger, “More EU Foreign and Security Policy,” Munich
Security Conference, February 17, 2017, https://www.securityconference.de/en/news/article/
more-eu-foreign-and-security-policy/.
27 For additional reading on NATO-EU security issues, along with practical steps for NATO to maximize
European Security and Defense Policy, see Robert Hunter, The European Security and Defense
Policy: NATO’s Companion or Competitor? (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2001).
28 After Brexit, 80 percent of NATO defense spending will come from non-EU NATO allies. See Jens
Stoltenberg, “Remarks by NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg at the ‘NATO Talk around
the Brandenburg Tor’ Conference,” Keynote Speech at the Brandenburg Tor Conference, Berlin,
NATO Speeches and Transcripts, November 12, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/
opinions_160241.htm; Douglas Barrie, “Could the EU deliver on its military ambitions after Brexit?”
International Institute for Strategic Studies, November 28, 2018, https://www.iiss.org/blogs/
military-balance/2018/11/could-eu-deliver-military-ambitions-Brexit.
29 For example, a 2017 special report by the Munich Security Conference offers recommendations
for how European governments considering increasing defense budgets can make smart choices
and lay a foundation for a more capable European security policy. See Wolfgang Ischinger et. al,
More European, More Connected, More Capable: Building the European Armed Forces of the Future
(Munich, Germany: Munich Security Conference, November 2017), https://www.securityconference.
de/en/news/article/more-european-more-connected-and-more-capable-msc-presents-newreport-
on-european-defense-coope/.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 47
30 “Brussels Summit Declaration: Issued by the Heads of State and Government participating in
the meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Brussels 11-12 July 2018,” NATO, September 5, 2014,
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_156624.htm.
31 For a partial illustration of the problem, see Niall McCarthy, “Europe Has Six Times As Many
Weapon Systems As the US,” Forbes, February 19, 2018, https://www.forbes.com/sites/niallmccarthy/
2018/02/19/europe-has-six-times-as-many-weapon-systems-as-the-u-s-infographic/#67cd-
90fa6e7a; for additional measures to address these issues in Europe, see Ischinger, More European,
More Connected…, 2017; finally, the United States should welcome EU initiatives such as the
Capability Development Process and Coordinated Annual Review on Defense (CARD), the European
Defense Fund (EDF), and Permanent Structured Cooperation on defense (PESCO) that have the
potential to strengthen allied security as a complement to NATO.
32 The European Global Strategy called for an end-state of “strategic autonomy,” while simultaneously
reiterating the need to “deepen” the EU’s “partnership” with NATO Shared Vision, See “Shared
Vision, Common Action: A Stronger Europe: A Global Strategy for the European Union’s Foreign
And Security Policy,” European Union, June 2016, https://europa.eu/globalstrategy/sites/globalstrategy/
files/regions/files/eugs_review_web_0.pdf.
33 “The North Atlantic Treaty,” NATO, April 4, 1949, accessed December 27, 2018, https://www.nato.
int/cps/ie/natohq/official_texts_17120.htm.
34 NATO was criticized for an overly accommodating approach toward authoritarian-leaning allies
in the 1960s and 1970s. A junta known as the Regime of the Colonels seized power in Greece
from April 1967 to 1974; Turkish military coups forced its government from power in 1960 and
1971; in Portugal, the authoritarian Estado Novo regime (1933-1974) ruled when Portugal joined
NATO as a founding member in 1949. See Lisa Sawyer Samp, “How to Deal with Authoritarianism
Inside NATO,” War on the Rocks, August 25, 2017, https://warontherocks.com/2017/08/
how-to-deal-with-authoritarianism-inside-nato/; Timothy Andrews Sayle, Enduring Alliance: A
History of NATO and the Postwar Global Order (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2019).
35 While twenty-six of the twenty-nine allies are still rated as “free”, compared with only 45 percent
of states worldwide, trends are disturbing. See Michael J. Abramowitz, Freedom in the World 2018
(Washington, DC: Freedom House, 2018), https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/FH_NationsInTransit_
Web_PDF_FINAL_2018_03_16.pdf.
36 Other reports echo Freedom House observations. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit’s
Democracy Index 2018, for example, Hungary’s score for political culture declined, resulting in an
overall score decline (p. 17) and Hungary’s score has been worsening since 2006 (p. 41); Turkey’s
ranking fell by 10 places in 2018 (p. 8) and its score has been declining since 2012 (p. 41); and
Poland’s trajectory has also been declining since 2014 (p. 42). See Economist Intelligence Unit,
Democracy Index 2018: Me Too?: Political participation, protest and democracy (London, UK:
Economist Intelligence Unit January 2019), https://www.eiu.com/topic/democracy-index.
37 Nate Schenkkan, Nations in Transit 2018: Confronting Illiberalism (Washington, DC: Freedom
House, 2018), https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/FH_NationsInTransit_Web_PDF_FINAL_
2018_03_16.pdf, p. 3.
48 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
38 Abramowitz, Freedom in the World, 2018, p. 7 and p. 10. Other allies face challenges as well,
including the United States. Albania, for example, continues to be ranked by Freedom House as
“partly free,” a status it has maintained for over two decades due to a historical legacy of corruption
and organized crime. Montenegro – the lowest scoring NATO ally after Turkey according to
Freedom House – has been ranked as “partly free” since 2016, a decline after five years of “free”
status from 2010 to 2015. Bulgaria and Romania, each facing entrenched political corruption
and problems with the discrimination of ethnic minorities, have received worse Freedom House
scores than Poland every year since they were admitted to the Alliance in 2004. Latvia received
a worse Freedom House score than Hungary each year since 2008 until as recently as 2017. See
“Country Reports,” Freedom House, accessed January 7, 2018, https://freedomhouse.org/report/
freedom-world/freedom-world-2018.
39 Abramowitz, Freedom in the World, 2018, p. 3.
40 Celeste Wallander, “NATO’s Enemies Within: How Democratic Decline Could Destroy the
Alliance,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 97 no. 4 (July/August 2018), https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
2018-06-14/natos-enemies-within.
41 Treaties are generally considered binding. See R. Jennings and A. Watts (ed.s), Oppenheim’s International
Law, vol. 1 (London, U.K.: Longman, 9th edition, 1996), p. 1206; “Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties,” adopted on 23 May 23, 1969, entered into force on January 27, 1980, 1155 UNTS
331, accessed December 29, 2018, https://treaties.un.org/doc/Treaties/1986/03/19860321%20
08-45%20AM/Ch_XXIII_03p.pdf.
42 “Press release Rule of Law: European Commission acts to defend judicial independence in
Poland,” European Commission, December 20, 2017, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-17-
5367_en.htm; “Rule of law in Hungary: Parliament calls on the EU to act,” European Parliament,
September 12, 2018, http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20180906IPR12104/
rule-of-law-in-hungary-parliament-calls-on-the-eu-to-act/; Pawel Florkiewicz and Pawel Sobczak,
“Poland reverses Supreme Court law changes after EU ruling,” Reuters, November 21, 2018, https://
www.reuters.com/article/us-poland-eu-court/poland-backtracks-on-supreme-court-law-contested-
by-eu-idUSKCN1NQ0VD.
43 As the Assembly has done in the past. See, for example, Stanley R. Sloan, “Turbulence and
Transitions in Transatlantic Relations,” Remarks before the Political Committee of the NATO
Parliamentary Assembly in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, November 18, 2018, https://server2.
charityadvantageservers.com/client/Atlantic_Community_Initiative_QCYIEC/Sloan%20NPA%20
Pol%20Comm%20Statement%20as%20presented.pdf.
44 For other options, see Celeste Wallander, “NATO’s Enemies Within: How Democratic Decline Could
Destroy the Alliance,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 97 no. 4 (July/August 2018), https://www.foreignaffairs.
com/articles/2018-06-14/natos-enemies-within; Norman Eisen and James Kirchick, “Yes, Russia
is a threat to NATO. So are the alliance’s anti-democratic members,” The Washington Post, July
11, 2018, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/posteverything/wp/2018/07/11/yes-russiais-
a-threat-to-nato-so-are-the-alliances-anti-democratic-members/; Katz and Taussig, “An
inconvenient truth”; Kemal Kirisci and Ilke Toygur, “As Turkish democracy Declines, What’s the Role
for Other NATO members?” Brookings Institution, July 23, 2018, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/
order-from-chaos/2018/07/23/as-turkish-democracy-declines-whats-the-role-for-fellow-natomembers/.
45 Sloan, Stanley R. Transatlantic traumas: has illiberalism brought the West to the brink of collapse?
(Manchester, U.K.: Manchester University Press, 2018).
46 All NATO decisions are made via the consensus procedure; no “votes” are currently taken in NATO
decision-making.
47 Seth A. Johnston, How NATO Adapts: Strategy and Organization in the Atlantic Alliance since 1950,
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017).
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 49
48 For example, in May 2017, Turkey blocked NATO cooperation with more than 40 partner countries
in retaliation for Austria blocking Turkey from joining the EU. Austria was prevented from taking
part in exercises or future operations with the Alliance despite the fact it has more than 400 troops
serving alongside NATO forces in Kosovo. See Justin Huggle, “Turkey blocks Nato partnerships in
row with Austria,” The Telegraph, May 27, 2017, https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/05/23/
turkey-blocks-nato-partnerships-row-austria.
49 General Curtis Scaparotti, “Opening Remarks,” Remarks by Supreme Allied Commander Europe,
General Curtis Scaparrotti at the joint press conference with General Petr Pavel and General Denis
Mercier at the 178th Military Committee in Chiefs of Defence Session,” NATO, January 17, 2018,
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_150789.htm.
50 Kathleen Hicks, Lisa Sawyer Samp, Olga Oliker, Jeffrey Rathke, Jeffrey Mankoff, Anthony Bell and
Heather Conley, Recalibrating U.S. Strategy Toward Russia: A New Time for Choosing (Washington,
DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 2017), https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.
com/s3fs-public/publication/170329_Hicks_USStrategyTowardRussia_Web.pdf, p. 65-86; Russia
also frequently holds large, destabilizing military exercises—most recently the Zapad 2017 military
exercise—without taking the proper pre-notification and observation requirements mandated
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to which Russia is a party. See Lee
Litzenberger, “Beyond Zapad 2017: Russia’s Destabilizing Approach to Military Exercises,” War
of the Rocks, November 28, 2017, https://warontherocks.com/2017/11/beyond-zapad-2017-russias-
destabilizing-approach-military-exercises/.
51 Paul Stronski and Richard Sokolsky, The Return of Global Russia: An Analytical Framework
(Washington, DC: The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, December 2017), https://
carnegieendowment.org/2017/12/14/return-of-global-russia-analytical-framework-pub-75003, p.
3-30.
52 The Harmel Report, published in 1967, introduced the notion of deterrence and détente. See “The
Harmel Report,” NATO, last updated November 17, 2017, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_
67927.htm. Since 2014, NATO repeatedly has reaffirmed this two-track approach; see “Wales
Summit Declaration,” paragraphs 21 and 49; “Warsaw Summit Communique: Issued by the Heads
of State and Government participating in the meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Warsaw 8-9
July 2016,” NATO, paragraph 11, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_133169.htm;
“Brussels Summit Declaration,” paragraph 5.
53 Mariusz Fryc, “From Wales to Warsaw and Beyond: NATO’s Strategic Adaptation to the Russian
Resurgence on Europe’s Eastern Flank,” Connection: The Quarterly Journal No. 4 (2016): 45-65.
54 For an in-depth analysis on this point, see Philip Breedlove and Alexander Vershbow, Permanent
Deterrence: Enhancements to the U.S. Military Presence in North Central Europe (Washington, DC:
The Atlantic Council, December 2018), https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/images//publications/
Permanent-Deterrence-Enhancements-to-the-US-Military-Presence-in-North-Central-Europe.pdf.
55 For other capabilities needed to enhance deterrence, see Scott Boston, Abby Doll, David Ochmanek
and David A. Shlapak, “A ‘Glass Half-Full’: Next Steps for Enhancing Deterrence on NATO’s Eastern
Flank,” RAND Corporation, February 12, 2018, https://www.rand.org/blog/2018/02/a-glass-halffull-
next-steps-for-enhancing-deterrence.html.
56 In a joint press briefing on August 28, 2018, Secretary James Mattis noted that the United States
had “gained full commitment to what we call the four 30s: 30 air squadrons, 30 naval ships, 30
combat battalions, all available to fight within 30 days.” See James Mattis and Joseph Dunford,
“Department Of Defense Press Briefing by Secretary Mattis and General Dunford in the Pentagon
Briefing Room,” Transcript, United States Department of Defense, August 28, 2018, https://dod.
defense.gov/News/Transcripts/Transcript-View/Article/1615116/department-of-defense-pressbriefing-
by-secretary-mattis-and-general-dunford-in/.
50 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
57 Rebecca Friedman Lissner, “Preventing a Credibility Crisis in America’s Most Important Alliance,”
War on the Rocks, March 10, 2017, https://warontherocks.com/2017/03/preventing-a-credibility-
crisis-in-americas-most-important-alliance/.
58 Christopher Chivvis, Understanding Russia ‘Hybrid War,’ and What Can be Done About it: Testimony
before the House Armed Services Committee, 115th Congress, March 22, 2017, https://www.rand.
org/content/dam/rand/pubs/testimonies/CT400/CT468/RAND_CT468.pdf.
59 Oren Dorell, “Alleged Russian political meddling documented in 27 countries since 2004,” USA
Today, September 7, 2017, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2017/09/07/alleged-russian-
political-meddling-documented-27-countries-since-2004/619056001/; NATO has taken
initial steps to deter cyber attacks by declaring in 2014 that a cyber attack can trigger Article 5. The
Wales Declaration affirmed that “cyber defence is part of NATO’s core task of collective defence. A
decision as to when a cyber attack would lead to the invocation of Article 5 would be taken by the
North Atlantic Council on a case-by-case basis.” See “Wales Declaration,” NATO.
60 “The North Atlantic Treaty.”
61 Glenn H. Snyder, Deterrence by Denial and Punishment (Princeton, NJ: Center of International
Studies, January 1959).
62 Kristi Raik and Pauli Jarvenpaa, A New Era of EU-NATO Cooperation: How to Make the Best of a
Marriage of Necessity (Estonia: Rahvusvahheline Kaitseuuringute Keskus International Centre for
Defence and Security, May 2017), https://icds.ee/wp-content/uploads/2018/ICDS_Report_A_
New_Era_of_EU-NATO.pdf, p. 12-14; Kevin Koehler, Enhancing EU-NATO Cooperation: Looking South
and Beyond (Zurich: ETH Zurich Center for Security Studies, June 2017) http://www.css.ethz.ch/
en/services/digital-library/articles/article.html/57da453c-b94e-44dd-b1c2-a35d12eed6e2/pdf.
63 Russia is already benefitting from and leveraging its relationships with Hungary and Turkey to
exacerbate discord within Europe and NATO. See Katz and Taussig, “An inconvenient truth.”
64 The Warsaw Summit Communique (2016) and Brussels Summit Communique (2018) both state
that the primary responsibility to respond to hybrid threats rests with the targeted nation, but
NATO is prepared to assist an ally at any stage of a hybrid campaign. NATO also established the
Counter Hybrid Support Teams at the 2018 Brussels Summit, which provide “targeted, tailored
assistances to Allies” in preparing for and responding to hybrid activities.
65 Stronski and Sokolsky, The Return of Global Russia, p. 11, 15-19.
66 Andrew Foxall, “Russia used to see itself as part of Europe. Here’s why that changed.” The Washington
Post, June 18, 2018, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2018/06/18/
russias-relations-with-the-e-u-werent-always-this-bad-but-theyve-been-deteriorating-for-a-longtime/
67 Stephen Hadley, “It’s Time to Stand up to Russia’s Aggression in Ukraine,” United States Institute
for Peace, January 30, 2019, https://www.usip.org/publications/2019/01/its-time-stand-russiasaggression-
ukraine.
68 Former Ambassador to NATO Robert Hunter recommends several general principles for Western
policies to address the continuing problem of Russian power in Europe. See Robert Hunter, “NATO
in Context: Geopolitics and the Problem of Russian Power,” Prism: A Journal of the Center for
Complex Operations, vol. 6 iss. 2 (July 2016).
69 See the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, “Vienna Document,” FSC DEL/94/10,
Forum for Security Cooperation, Vienna, December 22, 2011, https://www.osce.org/fsc/86597.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 51
70 Perceptions of Russia as a military threat following the Ukrainian crisis differ sharply across Europe
and are heavily influenced by geographical proximity to Russia. See Stephanie Pezard, Andrew
Radin, Thomas S. Szayna and F. Stephen Larrabee, European Relations with Russia: Threat Perceptions,
Responses, and Strategies in the Wake of the Ukrainian Crisis (Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation, 2017), https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR1500/
RR1579/RAND_RR1579.pdf.
71 Steven Pifer, “Arms control, security cooperation, and US-Russian relations,” Brookings Institution,
November 17, 2017, https://www.brookings.edu/research/arms-control-security-cooperation-
and-u-s-russian-relations/.
72 Amy Woolf, Russian Compliance with the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty: Background
and Issues for Congress Report for Congress No. R43832 (Congressional Research Service,
December, 2018), https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R43832.
73 James Acton suggests three ideas for NATO that may induce Russia to reverse its violation of the
INF Treaty. First, NATO allies could deploy cruise missile defenses, such as the Patriot Advanced
Capability-3, to protect transport and logistics facilities in Europe that are vulnerable to Russia’s
new ground-launched cruise missile. Second, NATO could deploy non-nuclear air-launch cruise
missiles and bombers to Europe to impose military costs on Russia. Third, NATO could implement
reciprocal inspection arrangements to resolve concerns each side has over Treaty violations. See
James Acton, “NATO Should Save the INF Treaty,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,
December 6, 2018, https://carnegieendowment.org/2018/12/06/nato-should-save-inf-treatypub-
77893.
74 See, for example, Alexander J. Motyl, “Lights Out for the Putin Regime: The Coming Russian
Collapse,” Foreign Affairs, January 27, 2016, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russian-federation/
2016-01-27/lights-out-putin-regime.
75 NATO led the UN-mandated International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) from August 2003 to
December 2014. In January 2015, NATO launched the Resolute Support Mission to train, advise and
assist Afghan security forces and institutions. See “NATO and Afghanistan,” NATO, last updated
November 27, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_8189.htm.
76 “NATO and Afghanistan,” 2018.
77 “Afghanistan,” United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, accessed December 27, 2018,
https://www.unhcr.org/afghanistan.html.
78 “Quarterly Report on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict: 1 January to 30 September,
2018,” UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, October 10, 2018, https://unama.unmissions.
org/sites/default/files/unama_protection_of_civilians_in_armed_conflict_3rd_quarter_report_
2018_10_oct.pdf; Idrees Ali, “Afghan security forces’ deaths unsustainable: U.S. military
official,” Reuters, December 4, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-afghanistan-military/
afghan-security-forces-deaths-unsustainable-u-s-military-official-idUSKBN1O32CS.
79 The United States dropped more bombs on Afghanistan in 2018 than any other year. According to
U.S. Air Forces Central Command data, manned and unmanned aircraft released 5213 weapons
between January and the end of September 2018. See “Airpower Summaries,” United States Air
Forces Central Command, last updated December 2018, http://www.afcent.af.mil/About/Airpower-
Summaries/.
80 Jessica Donati, “US Envoy, Taliban Officials Meet to Discuss Afghan Peace Talks,” Wall Street
Journal, July 25, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-envoy-taliban-officials-meet-to-discussafghan-
peace-talks-1532547118
52 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
81 Historically, the key to ending protracted insurgencies has usually been to accommodate the insurgents
within the new political order. See Colin P. Clarke and Christopher Paul, From Stalemate to
Settlement: Lessons for Afghanistan from Historical Insurgencies That Have Been Resolved Through
Negotiations (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2014), https://www.rand.org/content/dam/
rand/pubs/research_reports/RR400/RR469/RAND_RR469.pdf.
82 Asfandyar Mir, “US troop drawdown in Afghanistan raises big questions,” The Washington Post,
December 23, 2018, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2018/12/23/u-stroop-
drawdown-in-afghanistan-raises-big-questions/.
83 The financial commitments made at the Geneva donor conference in November 2018 make clear
just how large and continuous the financial aid to Afghanistan will have to be for a long time: The
international community reaffirmed its intention to provide $15.2 billion for Afghanistan’s development
priorities up to 2020 and to direct continuing but gradually declining financial support
to Afghanistan’s social and economic development throughout the Transformation Decade. See
“Securing Afghanistan’s Future: Peace, Self-Reliance and Connectivity,” Geneva Conference on
Afghanistan: Joint Communique, November 27-28, 2018, https://unama.unmissions.org/geneva-
conference-afghanistan.
84 Partnership for Peace: Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Finland,
Georgia, Ireland, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Malta, The Republic of Moldova, Russia, Serbia,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, Uzbekistan; Mediterranean Dialog: Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Mauritania, Morocco,
Tunisia; Istanbul Cooperation Initiative: Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, United Arab Emirates; Partners
from across the globe: Afghanistan, Australia, Colombia, Iraq, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mongolia,
New Zealand, Pakistan; International organizations: United Nations, European Union, Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. See “Partners,” NATO, last updated November 11, 2015,
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/51288.htm.
85 Ruben Díaz-Plaja, “Projecting Stability: an agenda for action,” NATO Review Magazine, March 13,
2018, https://www.nato.int/docu/review/2018/Also-in-2018/projecting-stability-an-agenda-for-action-
nato-partners/EN/index.htm.
86 Markus Kaim, Reforming NATO’s Partnerships (Berlin, Germany: Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik
German Institute for International and Security Affairs, 2017), https://www.swp-berlin.org/fileadmin/
contents/products/research_papers/2017RP01_kim.pdf.
87 The report’s authors list these partners as “priority” because of either their special arrangements
with NATO or prominence in Summit declarations. For example, NATO and Ukraine have a
“Distinctive Partnership” that is defined by the “Charter on a Distinctive Partnership between
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Ukraine.” In the case of Georgia, the Wales, Warsaw
and Brussels Summit Declarations have each noted that “Georgia’s relationship with the Alliance
contains the tools necessary to continue moving Georgia forward towards eventual membership.”
See the Wales Declaration, paragraph 93; the Warsaw Declaration, paragraph 111; the Brussels
Declaration, paragraph 65. For Iraq, paragraphs 34 and 94 Wales and Warsaw Summit Declarations,
respectively, re-affirm NATO’s continued commitment to the NATO-Iraq partnership. In the case
of Jordan, paragraphs 106 and 56 of the Warsaw and Brussels Declarations, respectively, reaffirm
commitment to NATO’s “longstanding partnership with Jordan.” In the case of Tunisia, paragraph
57 of the Brussels Declaration states, “We are committed to further developing our cooperation
with Tunisia.” Finally, Georgia, Jordan, Iraq and Tunisia are also part of NATO’s Defense and
Related Security Capacity Building Initiative. See “Defence and Related Security Capacity Building
Initiative,” NATO, last updated July 12, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_132756.
htm.
88 Kevin Drawbaugh,“Trump calls EU a ‘foe’ on trade: CBS News interview,” Reuters, July 5, 2018,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-eu-foe/trump-calls-eu-a-foe-on-trade-cbs-newsinterview-
idUSKBN1K50R6.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 53
89 For further reading on ways to increase EU-NATO-US cooperation, see Robert Hunter and Sven
Biscop, The United States, NATO and the EU: Partnership in the Balance (Washington, DC: The
Atlantic Council, February 2010), https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/publications/issue-briefs/theus-
nato-and-the-eu-partnership-in-the-balance.
90 Rachel A. Epstein, “NATO Enlargement and the Spread of Democracy: Evidence and Expectations,”
Security Studies 14 no. 1 (2005); Wallace J. Thies, Dorle Hellmuth and Ray Millen, “Does NATO
Enlargement Spread Democracy? Evidence from Three Cases,” Democracy and Security 2 no. 2
(January 2007); Wallander, “NATO’s Enemies Within.”
91 “The North Atlantic Treaty.”
92 “NATO decisions, however, cannot be subject to any veto or droit de regard by a non-member
state.” See “Study on NATO Enlargement,” NATO, September 3, 1995, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/
natohq/official_texts_24733.htm; “Brussels Summit Declaration,” paragraph 62; “Warsaw Summit
Declaration,” paragraph 110; “Wales Summit Declaration,” paragraph 92.
93 Burns, Nicholas, Joseph S. Nye, Jr. and Condoleezza Rice. “Maintaining America’s Edge: Technology
and National Security,” Washington, DC: The Aspen Institute, 2019.
94 Robert Work, “Remarks by Deputy Secretary Work on Third Offset Strategy, Remarks as Delivered
by Deputy Secretary,” United States Department of Defense, April 28, 2016, https://dod.
defense.gov/News/Speeches/Speech-View/Article/753482/remarks-by-d%20eputy-secretary-
work-on-third-offset-strategy/.
95 Burns et al., “Technology and National Security”; Steve Grobman, “Quantum Computing Must Be a
National Security Priority,” The Scientific American, October 25, 2018, https://blogs.scientificamerican.
com/observations/quantum-computing-must-be-a-national-security-priority/; Will Hurd,
“Quantum Computing is the Next Big Security Risk,” WIRED, December 7, 2017, https://www.wired.
com/story/quantum-computing-is-the-next-big-security-risk/.
96 Scholars have raised concerns about Huwei’s deployment of 5G networks in Europe, which could
be used by the Chinese government for espionage. See Erik Brattberg and Philippe Le Corre,
“Huawei and Europe’s 5G Conundrum,” National Interest, December 27, 2018, https://nationalinterest.
org/feature/huawei-and-europe%E2%80%99s-5g-conundrum-39972.
97 For example, advanced technologies like Artificial Intelligence could make it easier for adversaries
to “divide and dishearten” alliances. See Tomáš Valášek, “How Artificial Intelligence Could Disrupt
Alliances,” Carnegie Europe, August 31, 2017, https://carnegieeurope.eu/strategiceurope/72966.
98 NATO’s lack of action on AI stands in stark contrast to China’s rise as a global AI leader. China
released its 2020 AI ambitions and aims to be world leader by 2030, while in Europe, only a few
individual member states have been working on national AI strategies, with one of the most notable
being France. In April 2018, 25 European countries signed a declaration of cooperation on AI,
declaring their intentions to engage in an European approach to deal with AI. Meanwhile, Russia
has set a target of making 30 percent of military equipment robotic by 2025. See Karlijin Jans,
“NATO Needs to Get Smarter About AI,” Atlantic Council, July 10, 2018, https://www.atlanticcouncil.
org/blogs/new-atlanticist/nato-needs-to-get-smarter-about-ai.
99 “NATO Defence Planning Process,” NATO, last updated June 28, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/
en/natohq/topics_49202.htm.
100 “Chinese investment in Europe is increasing,” The Economist, October 20, 2018, https://www.
economist.com/graphic-detail/2018/10/10/chinese-investment-in-europe-is-increasing.
101 Philippe Le Corre, On Chinese Investment and Influence in Europe: Testimony before the House
Foreign Affairs Committee,” 115th Congress, May 23, 2018, https://docs.house.gov/meetings/FA/
FA14/20180523/108355/HHRG-115-FA14-Wstate-LeCorreP-20180523.pdf.
54 NATO at Seventy: An Alliance in Crisis
102 The GDP value of the European Union represents 27.87 percent of the world economy. See “European
Union GDP,” Trading Economics, accessed December 27, 2018, https://tradingeconomics.com/
european-union/gdp; “Living in the EU,” European Union, accessed December 27, 2018, https://
europa.eu/european-union/about-eu/figures/living_en
103 “Chinese investment, and influence, in Europe is growing,” The Economist, October 14, 2018,
https://www.economist.com/briefing/2018/10/04/chinese-investment-and-influence-in-europe-
is-growing
104 “China to develop Arctic shipping routes opened by global warming,” BBC News, January 26, 2018,
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-42833178.
105 Thorsten Benner, Jan Gaspers, Mareike Ohlberg, Lucrezia Poggetti, and Kristin Shi-Kupfer, Authoritarian
Advance: Responding to China’s Growing Political Influence in Europe (Berlin, Germany:
Mercator Institute for China Studies, February 2018), https://www.merics.org/sites/default/
files/2018-02/GPPi_MERICS_Authoritarian_Advance_2018_1.pdf.
106 Benner et. al, “Authoritarian Advance,” p. 16.
107 Benner et. al, “Authoritarian Advance,” p. 16.
108 Philip Blenkinsop, “With eyes on China, EU agrees investment screening rules,” Reuters, November
20, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-eu-china-investment/with-eyes-on-china-eu-agreesinvestment-
screening-rules-idUSKCN1NP1IJ.
109 See, for example, Stanley R. Sloan, “Don’t Expect a New NATO Strategic Concept Any Time Soon,”
Atlantic Council, February 24, 2017, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/don-texpect-
a-new-nato-strategic-concept-any-time-soon.
110 President George H.W. Bush, “A Europe Whole and Free,” Remarks to the Citizens in Mainz,
Rheingoldhalle, U.S. Diplomatic Mission to the Federal Republic of Germany, May 31, 1989, https://
usa.usembassy.de/etexts/ga6-890531.htm.
111 “Member Countries,” NATO, last updated March 26, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/em/natohq/
topics_52044.htm.
112 “Member Countries,” NATO; “Partners,” NATO.
113 Ivo Daalder, NATO in the 21st Century: What Purpose, What Missions? (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
Institution, April 1999), https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/reportch1.pdf.
114 To be sure, the September 12, 2001 decision was contingent on evidence that the attacks originated
from a foreign source. When U.S. officials confirmed this to the North Atlantic Council early in
October, 2001 invocation of Article 5 became official. See North Atlantic Council, “Statement by the
North Atlantic Council,” September 12, 2001, https://www.nato.int/docu/pr/2001/p01-124e.htm;
Lord George Robertson, “Statement by NATO Secretary General,” October 2, 2001, https://www.
nato.int/docu/speech/2001/s011002a.htm.
115 “Casualty Status as of 10 a.m. EST Feb. 4, 2019,” United States Department of Defense, accessed
February 4, 2019, https://dod.defense.gov/News/Casualty-Status/; “Afghanistan Fatalities,
Fatalities by Country,” iCasualties, www.iCasualties.org,”
116 The Washington Post Editorial Board, “Russia marches on uninhibited in eastern Ukraine,” The
Washington Post, February 18, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/russia-marches-
on-uninhibited-in-eastern-ukraine/2015/02/18/d43a48d4-b78b-11e4-aa05-1ce812b3fdd2_story.
html.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 55
117 “Terrorism in the EU: terror attacks, deaths and arrests,” European Parliament, July 25, 2018,
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/security/20180703STO07125/terrorismin-
the-eu-terror-attacks-deaths-and-arrests; Philipp Connor, “Most displaced Syrians are in the
Middle East, and about a million are in Europe,” Pew Research Center, January 29, 2018, http://
www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/01/29/where-displaced-syrians-have-resettled/ .
118 “Mediterranean Situation,” United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, accessed December
4, 2018, https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/mediterranean.
119 See, for example, United States Congress, Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Assessing the
Value of the NATO Alliance, 115th Congress, September 5, 2018, https://www.foreign.senate.gov/
hearings/assessing-the-value-of-the-nato-alliance-090518.
120 James Goldgeier, “When President Trump heads to Europe, discussion turns to burden-sharing,”
The Washington Post, November 14, 2018, //https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-
cage/wp/2018/07/09/president-trump-goes-to-europe-this-week-its-leaders-are-bracing-forthe-
impact/.
121 Jens Stoltenberg, “The Value of NATO in the 21st Century,” Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC,
September 14, 2018, https://www.heritage.org/defense/event/the-value-nato-the-21st-century/.
122 Shayerah Illias Akhtar, US-EU Trade and Investment Ties: Magnitude and Scope Report for Congress
(Congressional Research Service, July 20, 2018), https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF10930.pdf.
123 European allies are the largest foreign investors in the United States, over $2.3 trillion in 2017, and
the U.S.’s largest trading partners in goods and services, approximately $1.2 trillion in 2017. See
Akhtar, US-EU Trade and Investment Ties, 2018.
124 “The North Atlantic Treaty.”
125 Stoltenberg, “The Value of NATO in the 21st Century.”
126 Bush, “A Europe Whole and Free.”
127 Smeltz et al., “America Engaged,” p. 4.


Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org/Transatlantic
Copyright 2019, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America